ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104239
ContentslistsavailableatScienceDirect
Artificial Intelligence
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/artint
✩
AI-driven transcriptome profile-guided hit molecule generation
Chen Li∗, Yoshihiro Yamanishi
GraduateSchoolofInformatics,NagoyaUniversity,Chikusa,Nagoya,464-8601,Japan
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords: 𝐷𝑒 𝑛𝑜𝑣𝑜 generation of bioactive and drug-like hit molecules is a pivotal goal in computer-
Transcriptome profiles aided drug discovery. While artificial intelligence (AI) has proven adept at generating molecules
Hit molecule generation with desired chemical properties, previous studies often overlook the influence of disease-
DualVAEs
specific cellular environments. This study introduces GxVAEs, a novel AI-driven deep generative
model designed to produce hit molecules from transcriptome profiles using dual variational
autoencoders (VAEs). The first VAE, ProfileVAE, extracts latent features from transcriptome
profiles to guide the second VAE, MolVAE, in generating hit molecules. GxVAEs aim to bridge
the gap between molecule generation and the biological context of disease, producing molecules
that are biologically relevant within specific cellular environments or pathological conditions.
Experimental results and case studies focused on hit molecule generation demonstrate that GxVAEs
surpass current state-of-the-art methods, in terms of reproducibility of known ligands. This
approach is expected to effectively find potential molecular structures with bioactivities across
diverse disease contexts.
1. Introduction
Identifying hit molecules with the desired bioactivity and therapeutic effects within the vast expanse of chemical space is a major
challenge in drug discovery [1]. Despite the theoretical existence of over 1060 organic molecules, only a tiny fraction exhibit drug-
like properties. Traditionally, hit identification has depended on experimental techniques such as high-throughput screening (HTS)
[2]. HTS is a valuable tool for finding bioactive hits [3], yet its success rate tends to be low, with many molecules proving inactive
or less promising [4]. Additionally, these experimental methods are usually labor-intensive and time-consuming, often requiring
significant resources and expertise to execute effectively. The entire drug development process can extend up to 12years and require
an investment exceeding 1.8billion US dollars, encompassing various stages from initial screening and preclinical testing to multiple
phases of clinical trials and regulatory approval [5]. This lengthy and costly process underscores the need for more efficient and cost-
effective methods of hit identification and drug development. Despite extensive pre-market testing designed to ensure the efficacy
and safety of drug candidates, more than 90% of these candidate molecules fail to reach the market [6]. This high failure rate is
a testament to the inherent difficulties and high-risk nature of drug discovery and development. It highlights the critical need for
innovation in methodologies and technologies for identifying and developing new therapeutic agents. Advances in computational
drug discovery [7] and artificial intelligence (AI) [8] are poised to complement traditional experimental approaches, potentially
enhancing the efficiency and success rates of drug discovery pipelines.
✩ This paper is an invited revision of a paper which first appeared at the 38th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-24).
* Correspondingauthor.
E-mailaddresses:li.chen.z2@a.mail.nagoya-u.ac.jp(C.Li),yamanishi@i.nagoya-u.ac.jp(Y.Yamanishi).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2024.104239
Received 7 July 2024; Received in revised form 29 September 2024; Accepted 18 October 2024
Availableonline22October2024
0004-3702/© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

C.LiandY.Yamanishi ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104239
AI-driven 𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑜𝑣𝑜molecule generation represents a paradigm shift in computer-aided drug discovery. By integrating deep learning
and computational chemistry, this approach generates entirely new molecules from scratch, without relying on existing compounds.
It leverages a range of innovative strategies to design novel molecules with desirable chemical properties, offering a powerful tool
for advancing drug discovery. Sophisticated deep generative models, such as generative adversarial networks (GANs) [9–11] and
variational autoencoders (VAEs) [12–15], are central to this advancement. These models revolutionize the drug discovery pipeline
by efficiently generating molecules with predefined bioactivity profiles. Trained on vast datasets comprising compounds with known
bioactivities, these models excel at discerning intricate molecular patterns and relationships, allowing them to produce new molecules
that closely mimic desired structural and functional characteristics. By generating molecules with desired optimized properties, AI-
driven 𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑜𝑣𝑜approaches streamline the iterative process of drug design and discovery, significantly accelerating the exploration and
identification of promising candidates for further development. This integration of AI into molecule generation not only enhances
the efficiency of drug discovery efforts but also expands the scope of chemical diversity accessible for therapeutic innovation. As
these technologies evolve, they hold promise for unlocking novel treatments that address unmet medical needs with unprecedented
precision and efficacy.
However, current AI-driven approaches frequently neglect crucial biological aspects, especially the complex interactions among
molecules within biological systems and their specific cellular contexts in disease states. This oversight undermines the capacity
of AI-generated molecules to interact effectively with biological targets and achieve desired therapeutic effects. A primary goal of
AI-driven drug discovery is to reconcile chemical feasibility with biological efficacy. This requires deeper insights into molecular
interactions within biological environments, crucial for enhancing the utility and success rate of AI-generated molecules in clinical
applications. Adopting a holistic approach presents new opportunities for discovering breakthrough therapies that not only possess
optimal chemical properties but also demonstrate robust efficacy and safety profiles in complex biological settings. An emerging
strategy to address these challenges involves generating hit molecules using omics data, encompassing genomics, epigenomics, and
transcriptomes [16]. Transcriptome profiles offer a comprehensive molecular landscape describing how human cells respond to drug
therapy and the underlying pathological processes of diseases [17]. For example, transcriptome profiles provide valuable insights
into gene activities across various cellular contexts, including specific disease states [18]. Analyzing transcriptome profiles reveals
dynamic changes such as gene expression and transcriptional variations driven by physiological conditions or disease progression,
offering insights into the cellular context affecting therapeutic response and disease evolution.
Transcriptome profile-based approaches offer significant promise in drug discovery, yet they come with inherent challenges [19].
Firstly, the availability of comprehensive and high-quality transcriptome profiles for molecules remains limited. Additionally, in-
terpreting and integrating transcriptome profiles pose substantial complexity and require advanced bioinformatics and statistical
techniques to extract meaningful insights and identify relevant molecular signatures. Moreover, applying transcriptome profiles in
the context of drug discovery demands a deep understanding of underlying biological and disease mechanisms. While some stud-
ies have leveraged transcriptome profiles to generate hit molecules [20,21], these efforts often lack direct associations between the
source molecules and their corresponding transcriptome profiles. Consequently, the performance of generated hit molecules, such as
their ability to interact effectively with target proteins, remains relatively modest and indicates room for improvement.
In this study, we introduce GxVAEs, an innovative approach for generating hit molecules from transcriptome profiles using dual
VAEs: ProfileVAE and MolVAE. ProfileVAE acts as a feature extractor, utilizing transcriptome profile data to derive latent features that
guide MolVAE in producing molecules. By integrating the dual VAEs, GxVAEs effectively bridge the gap between molecule generation
and the intricate cellular environments of biological systems, thereby enhancing the biological relevance of the generated molecules
tailored for specific diseases. This study builds upon our previous work [22], expanding on the methodology and highlighting key
contributions:
• Integration of cellular environments in molecule generation: This study incorporates the influence of cellular environments
on disease contexts during the molecule generation process.
• Simple yet robust model architecture: The streamlined dual VAE design produces hit molecules from transcriptome profiles.
• Demonstrated superiority over state-of-the-art (SOTA) models: GxVAEs exhibit superior performance compared to existing
models designed for similar objectives, validating their effectiveness in advancing drug discovery in biomedicine.
The remainder of the study is organized as follows. Section 2 surveys existing approaches in molecule generation. Section 3
introduces GxVAEs, our proposed method for generating hit molecules from transcriptome profiles. Section4details comprehensive
experiments and case studies aimed at validating the effectiveness of GxVAEs compared to SOTA models. Finally, Section5summarizes
this study and outlines future research directions.
2. Related work
𝐷𝑒𝑛𝑜𝑣𝑜molecule generation is instrumental in designing new molecules tailored to specific chemical properties, utilizing three
primary data representations: 1-dimensional sequence-based representations, such as simplified molecular input line entry system
(SMILES) strings [23], 2-dimensional (2D) molecular graphs [24], and 3-dimensional (3D) geometric structures [25]. These repre-
sentations offer distinct advantages in capturing different aspects of molecular structures, from linear sequences suitable for database
storage and modeling to detailed graphical and spatial arrangements essential for understanding molecular interactions and proper-
ties.
2

C.LiandY.Yamanishi ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104239
2.1. SMILES-based molecule generation
SMILES strings provide a straightforward linear representation of molecular structures, making them well-suited for efficient
database storage and computational modeling. They are easy to manage in chemical databases and straightforward to process in
molecular modeling applications. Deep generative models such as TransVAE [13]and GrammarVAE [14]utilize VAEs, whereas Scaf-
foldRNN [26], BIMODAL [27], and EarlGAN [28]employ recurrent neural networks (RNNs) for molecule generation from SMILES
strings. To bolster robustness in molecule generation, TransORGAN [11]adopts a Transformer architecture within a GAN framework
to produce valid SMILES strings. Similarly, TenGAN [29]and SpotGAN [30]apply a pure Transformer encoder and a reversal Trans-
former (first-decoder-then-encoder) GAN respectively, to train models capable of generating diverse SMILES representations. The
increasing popularity of diffusion models has led to the emergence of SMILES-based approaches such as MDM [31]and TGM-DLM
[32], which leverage diffusion processes for molecule generation and have gained significant attention in the research community.
Moreover, alternative representations of SMILES, such as DeepSMILES [33]and GenSMILES [34], have been proposed to enhance
molecular validity. These variants aim to improve upon the traditional SMILES format for better molecule generation capabilities.
Additionally, SELFIES [35]presents another sequential representation that tends to produce overly long chains and large rings in
molecules [36].
2.2. Graph-based molecule generation
Molecular graphs serve as detailed representations where atoms are nodes and chemical bonds are edges, providing specifics on
atom and bond types (single, double, triple). JTVAE [15]employs a node tree methodology for constructing these graphs, integrating
tree-structured scaffolds through graphical message-passing networks [37]. MolGAN [10]uses a reinforcement learning-guided GAN
framework to generate molecular graphs with defined chemical properties, while ALMGIG [38], an extension of the bidirectional
GAN model, employs adversarial cyclic consistency loss to learn molecular space distributions and generate new molecules. Sim-
ilarly, geometric structure approaches often employ equivalent neural networks [39] to capture precise spatial arrangements and
atom interactions, offering insights into molecular geometry and potential interactions with biological targets, thereby advancing
applications in drug discovery and materials science.
2.3. Hit molecule generation
Previous studies in 𝑑𝑒 𝑛𝑜𝑣𝑜 molecule generation have primarily focused on optimizing the chemical properties of generated
molecules based on their structural information. However, these approaches often overlooked the biological environment and cellular
context of diseases [40], as well as the cell-specific activities of the molecules produced [41,42]. The evolution of omics data analysis,
particularly transcriptome profiles in drug discovery [43,44], has spurred efforts to incorporate comprehensive biological response
data into the development of therapeutic molecules tailored for specific diseases.
ExpressionGAN [20]and TRIOMPHE [21]stand as leading deep generative models for generating hit molecules interacting ther-
apeutic target proteins without prior annotations of training molecules. ExpressionGAN integrates systems biology and molecular
design to generate molecules capable of inducing desired transcriptome features directly from gene expression profiles. TRIOMPHE
first calculates correlation coefficients to evaluate the strength of the relationship between target perturbation profiles (which reflect
cellular responses to target proteins) and chemically induced profiles (which represent cellular responses to compound treatment).
It then selects the molecules most closely aligned with the chemically induced profiles as source molecules for a VAE model. This
model subsequently generates molecules designed to correspond with the target perturbation profiles.
Despite the potential of transcriptome profiles to tailor bioactive molecules for arbitrary target proteins within cellular contexts,
ExpressionGAN encounters challenges such as producing hit molecules with low validity (>8.5%) and limited ability to replicate
known ligands. Furthermore, understanding the transcriptional correlation between ligands and targets remains elusive. In con-
trast, TRIOMPHE relies exclusively on transcriptome profiles for correlation calculations, omitting a VAE in the molecule generation
process. To address these limitations, this study introduces GxVAEs, an innovative approach designed to bridge the gap between
the cellular environment and therapeutic molecule generation. By leveraging transcriptome profiles, GxVAEs facilitate the creation
of biologically meaningful molecules tailored to specific disease contexts, thereby advancing precision in drug discovery. Unlike
traditional 𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑜𝑣𝑜 molecule generation, which often focus solely on optimizing chemical properties, GxVAEs integrate biological
relevance into the molecule design process, aiming to produce therapeutically relevant compounds with a higher degree of accu-
racy.
3. GxVAEs
Fig.1presents an overview of GxVAEs, a dual VAE framework consisting of ProfileVAE and MolVAE, designed for generating
hit molecules from transcriptome profiles. ProfileVAE serves as a crucial component by extracting essential features from high-
dimensional transcriptome profiles, condensing them into low-dimensional feature vectors. These extracted features capture nuanced
information related to biological responses, thereby guiding MolVAE in the generation of molecules. MolVAE, on the other hand,
utilizes bidirectional gated recurrent units (GRUs) [45]conditioned on the feature vectors extracted by ProfileVAE. This condition-
ing ensures that the molecule generation process is influenced by the underlying biological context inferred from the transcriptome
3

C.LiandY.Yamanishi ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104239
Fig.1.OverviewofGxVAEs.(a)Exposureamoleculetocellsinducesaspecifictranscriptomeprofile.Thistranscriptomeprofile,alteredbythemolecule“CC(=O)oc1cc-
ccc1C(=O)O”,manifestsasfoldchangesingeneexpressionvalues.(b)TheaffectedtranscriptomeprofileisfedintotheProfileVAEencoder,whereitistransformed
intoalatentspacerepresentationoftranscriptomeprofiles.TheresultingfeaturevectoristhenusedbytheProfileVAEdecodertoreconstructtheoriginaltranscriptome
profile.(c)TheextractedtranscriptomeprofilefeaturesarecombinedwiththevariantSMILESrepresentationofthemolecule(e.g.,“c1cc(c(cc1)C(O)=O)OC(C)=O”),
servingasinputtothebidirectionalGRUencoderofMolVAE.Thisencoderextractscondition-constrainedmolecularfeaturesandmapsthemtothelatentspace
representationofSMILES.Subsequently,thebidirectionalGRUdecoderreconstructsthesefeaturesbackintotheoriginalmolecularstructure.Duringtrainingprocess,
teacherforcingisemployedtostabilizelearningandexpeditetheconvergenceofMolVAE.(d)Duringinference(illustratedbyblackarrows),onlyProfileVAE’sencoder
andMolVAE’sdecoderareutilized.AnunknowntranscriptomeprofileisinputtoProfileVAE’sencoder,withtheextractedfeaturesthenusedbyMolVAE’sdecoderto
generatehitmoleculesexhibitingtranscriptomeprofiles.
profiles. MolVAE generates molecules in the form of variant SMILES strings [29,30], which allow for flexibility in molecular repre-
sentation. To optimize the training process, teacher forcing [46]is employed during the MolVAE training. This technique stabilizes
training and accelerates convergence by guiding the model with correct sequences during initial phases, facilitating more efficient
learning and better performance in generating molecules that align with desired biological and chemical criteria.
ProfileVAE. Let 𝑿=[𝑥 1, 𝑥 2, ⋯ , 𝑥 𝐾] denote a transcriptome profile (e.g., gene expression profile) containing 𝐾 genes, where 𝑥 𝑘
represents the 𝑘-th gene value. The objective of ProfileVAE is to model the marginal likelihood of the transcriptome profile through
the following generative procedure:
m 𝜽,a 𝝓x𝔼 𝑞𝜽(𝑪|𝑿)[log𝑝 𝝓(𝑿|𝑪)], (1)
where 𝔼[⋅]denotes the expectation operation, 𝑪 represents the latent variable, and 𝜽and 𝝓are the parameters of the ProfileVAE
encoder and decoder, respectively. Additionally, 𝑝 𝝓(𝑿|𝑪)refers to the likelihood function, while 𝑞 𝜽(𝑪|𝑿)represents the posterior
distribution. The loss function for the ProfileVAE is formulated as follows:
 𝐺(𝜽,𝝓,𝑿,𝑪,𝛽)=𝔼 𝑞𝜽(𝑪|𝑿)[log𝑝 𝝓(𝑿|𝑪)] (2)
−𝛽⋅𝐷 𝐾𝐿(𝑞 𝜽(𝑪|𝑿)||𝑝 𝝓(𝑪)),
where 𝛽 represents the weight of the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence 𝐷 𝐾𝐿 [47]. During inference, the latent vector 𝑪 for a given
transcriptome profile is derived using the reparameterization trick with a unit normal distribution:
𝑪=𝝁+𝝈𝝐, 𝝐∼(𝟎,𝑰), (3)
where 𝝁and 𝝈 are the mean and standard deviation of the Gaussian distribution, respectively. This reparameterization technique
ensures that the sampling process is differentiable, enabling efficient backpropagation and optimization of ProfileVAE’s parameters
during the training process.
4

C.LiandY.Yamanishi ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104239
MolVAE. Let 𝑺=[𝑠 1, 𝑠 2, ⋯ , 𝑠 𝑇]represent a SMILES string, where 𝑠 𝑡denotes the 𝑡-th atom. Assume 𝑺is reconstructed from the latent
variable 𝒁and conditioned on the extracted features through 𝑺∼𝑝 𝝋(𝑺|𝒁), parameterized by 𝝋. The probability distribution can be
expressed as:
∏𝑇
𝑝 𝝋(𝑺|𝒁)= 𝑝 𝝋(𝑠 𝑡|𝑠 1,𝒁,𝑪). (4)
𝑡=1
Here, the feature vectors 𝑪 derived from the transcriptome profiles are utilized as conditioning inputs for MolVAE. The objective of
MolVAE is to optimize the lower bound of the true log-marginal likelihood, formulated as:
 𝑆(𝝋,𝝍,𝑺,𝒁,𝑪)=𝔼 𝑞𝝍(𝒁|𝑺)[log𝑝 𝝋(𝑺|𝒁)] (5)
−𝐷 𝐾𝐿(𝑞 𝝍(𝒁|𝑺)||𝑝 𝝋(𝒁)).
Variant SMILES enables traversal of a molecular graph starting from different atoms, yielding diverse non-canonical SMILES rep-
resentations of the same molecular structure. These variants are crucial for training models, ensuring the generation of diverse
molecules during the training phase. An example illustrating variant SMILES is included in Appendix A. Furthermore, teacher
forcing is employed during the training of MolVAE to enhance stability and accelerate convergence (refer to Appendix B for de-
tails).
Algorithm 1 Procedures for GxVAEs.
Data: Transcriptome profiles 𝑿and the intercorrelated SMILES strings 𝑺
1: /*TrainingphaseoftheProfileVAE*/
2: for𝑖 ←1to g-epochsdo
3: TrainProfileVAEwithEq.(2).
4: Update the parameters of 𝜽and 𝝓.
5: endfor
6: RetainonlytheencoderofProfileVAEandextractthefeaturesoftranscriptomeprofileswithEq.(3).
7: /*TrainingphaseoftheMolVAE*/
8: for𝑗←1to s-epochsdo
9: TrainMolVAEwithEq.(5).
10: Update the parameters of 𝝋.
11: endfor
12: RetainonlythedecoderofMolVAEandgenerateSMILESstringswithEq.(4).
13: /*InferencephaseoftheGxVAEs*/
14: CombineProfileVAE’sencoderwithMolVAE’sdecoderforGxVAEs.
15: for𝑛 ←1to 𝑁do
16: Extract features 𝑪from transcriptome profiles.
17: Sample Gaussian noise 𝒁.
18: Generatehitmoleculesfromtranscriptomeprofiles.
19: endfor
Algorithm1delineates the training strategies employed for GxVAEs. The process begins with the training of ProfileVAE, where
the model is initially trained, and only the encoder component is retained after completion. This encoder is crucial for extracting
features from transcriptome profiles. Subsequently, these features, accompanied by the corresponding SMILES strings, serve as inputs
for training MolVAE. Following the completion of MolVAE training, the decoder component is exclusively retained for molecule
generation purposes. In the final step, we integrate ProfileVAE’s encoder with the MolVAE’s decoder, allowing for the joint generation
of hit molecules from transcriptome profiles.
4. Experiments
We conducted comprehensive experiments to investigate the following research questions (RQs):
• RQ1: To what extent does ProfileVAE capture features from transcriptome profiles?
• RQ2: Does MolVAE effectively capture internal molecular features, and how proficiently does it generate molecules?
• RQ3: Can GxVAEs generate potential candidate hit molecules?
4.1. Experimental setup
Datasets. Three distinct types of transcriptome profiles were employed to evaluate the effectiveness of GxVAEs:
• Chemically induced profiles were obtained from the LINCS database [48], which catalogs transcriptome value changes in
response to diverse chemical compounds across 77 human cell lines. For instance, our analysis included data from the MCF7 cell
line treated with a comprehensive set of 13, 755distinct molecules. This dataset provides insights into how different chemicals
induce varied molecular responses within cellular contexts.
5

C.LiandY.Yamanishi ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104239
• Target perturbation profileswere obtained from the LINCS database, focusing on transcriptome alterations caused by targeted
genetic interventions across the same 77 human cell lines. These interventions typically involve manipulating the expression
levels of key proteins like RAC-𝛼 serine / threonine-protein kinase (AKT1), RAC-𝛽 serine / threonine-protein kinase (AKT2),
Aurora B kinase (AURKB), cysteine synthase A (CTSK), epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1),
mammalian target of rapamycin (MTOR), phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase catalytic subunit (PIK3CA), decapentaplegic homolog 3
(SMAD3), and tumor protein p53 (TP53), which play crucial roles in numerous cancers.
• Disease-specific profileswere retrieved from the crowd extracted expression of differential signatures (CREEDS) database [49].
These profiles aggregate transcriptome patterns from 14, 804genes associated with various diseases such as gastric cancer, atopic
dermatitis, and Alzheimer’s disease. By consolidating transcriptome profiles from multiple patients, we derived representative
profiles that reflect the molecular signatures unique to each disease condition.
In this study, the chemically induced profiles dataset served as the training set for our GxVAEs model, providing essential data
for the model to learn how to generate molecules based on cellular responses to chemical treatments. The target perturbation profile
dataset was utilized to evaluate the GxVAEs model’s ability to generate molecules tailored to specific protein targets involved in
disease mechanisms, allowing us to assess how well the generated molecules align with the intended target perturbations. For the
case study on therapeutic molecule generation, the disease-specific profile dataset was employed to determine how effectively GxVAEs
could produce molecules suited to specific disease contexts, thereby enabling us to evaluate the model’s performance in generating
therapeutically relevant candidates.
Implementation details. ProfileVAE employed an encoder and decoder architecture comprising three feedforward layers with dimen-
sions of 512, 256, and 128. The learning rate was set to 1e−4, and dropout with a probability of 0.2was applied during training.
MolVAE utilized an embedding size of 128and featured three hidden layers sized at 256. The learning rate for MolVAE was 5e−4,
with a dropout probability of 0.1. Additionally, a temperature parameter 𝛽 of 1.0was incorporated. The maximum length of gen-
erated SMILES strings was limited to 100 characters. Both ProfileVAE and MolVAE used latent vectors of dimensionality 64, with
a consistent batch size across all experiments. ProfileVAE was trained over 2000 epochs, while MolVAE underwent 200 epochs
of training. Computational experiments were performed using an NVIDIA Tesla T4 GPU with CUDA version of 11.4. A more de-
tailed description of the experimental setup can be found in AppendixC. The source code used for the experiments is available on
GitHub.1
4.2. Evaluation measures
We rigorously evaluated the quality and effectiveness of newly generated hit molecules using the following metrics:
• Validity determines the percentage of chemically valid molecules, verified using the RDKit tool [50]. Low validity suggests
potential issues during the model training. The calculation is expressed as:
Numberofchemicallyvalidmolecules
Validity= .
Thetotalnumberofmoleculesgenerated
• Uniquenessquantifies the proportion of unique molecules among those identified as valid. Low uniqueness indicates issues such
as mode collapse. The calculation is performed as follows:
Numberofnon-repeatedmolecules
Uniqueness= .
Numberofvalidmolecules
• Noveltymeasures the proportion of unique molecules that are absent from the training set. Low novelty indicates an over-fitting
problem. The calculation is shown below:
Novelty= Numberofnovelmolecules .
Numberofuniquemolecules
• Quantitative estimate of drug-likeness (QED)assesses whether a particular molecule is similar to known drugs. Usually, QED
score is determined by assigning weights to eight molecular descriptors: molecular weight, octanol-water partition coefficient,
number of hydrogen bond donors, number of hydrogen bond acceptors, molecular polar surface area, number of rotatable bonds,
number of aromatic rings, and number of structural alarms [51]. The calculation is as follows:
∑
8 ∑=1𝑊 𝑖ln𝑑
QED=exp( 𝑖 𝑖 ),
8 𝑊
𝑖=1 𝑖
where 𝑑 𝑖represents the desirability function and 𝑊 𝑖denotes the weight assigned to the i-th molecular descriptor. These weights
are typically determined through chemical experiments. In this study, we calculated the QED score using the RDKit tool. A higher
QED score indicates a higher likelihood that the molecule exhibits drug-like properties.
1 Source code available at: https://github .com /naruto7283 /GxVAEs.
6

C.LiandY.Yamanishi ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104239
• Synthetic accessibility (SA)score evaluates the ease of molecule synthesis. A higher SA score indicates less complex and more
easily synthesizable compounds, calculated by
∑5
SA=𝑟 𝑠− 𝑝 𝑖.
𝑖=1
Here, 𝑟 𝑠represents the “synthetic knowledge” derived from analyzing synthetic molecule features. It is the ratio of the summed
contributions of all fragments to the number of fragments in the molecule [52]. The terms 𝑝 𝑖(where 𝑖ranges from 1 to 5) denote
ring complexity, stereo complexity, macrocycle penalty, size penalty, and bridge penalty, all calculated using the RDKit tool.
• Lipo-hydro partition coefficient (logP)score is defined as the ratio of a molecule’s concentration in a mixture of two immiscible
solvents at equilibrium [29], which can be expressed as
𝑐
𝑜,
logP=log
𝑐
𝑤
where 𝑐 𝑜 and 𝑐 𝑤 denote the substance’s activity in the organic and water phases, respectively. A higher logP score represents
increased lipophilicity of the molecule towards the organic phase.
• Tanimoto coefficientscore was used to assess the structural similarity of generated molecules with known ligands of the corre-
sponding target proteins, employing the ECFP4 fingerprint [53]. Molecules that are structurally similar to a ligand often exhibit
a similar mode of action. The calculation is performed as follows:
𝑁
Tanimoto= 𝐴𝐵 ,
𝑁 𝐴+𝑁 𝐵−𝑁
𝐴𝐵
where 𝑁 𝐴 and 𝑁 𝐵 represent the number of bits in the fingerprints of molecular structures A and B, respectively, and 𝑁 𝐴𝐵
denotes the number of bits common to both fingerprints. In practice, we utilize “GetMorganfingerprintAsBitVect” and “BulkTan-
imotoSimilarity” from the RDKit tool to compute ECFP4 fingerprints and Tanimoto coefficients.
The statistics, including validity, uniqueness, and novelty, were utilized for evaluating the generated molecules. Chemical proper-
ties such as QED, SA, and logP scores were employed to assess quality of the generated molecules. Additionally, Tanimoto coefficients
were used to measure the similarity of the generated molecules with known ligands of the corresponding target proteins. All measures
were normalized to a 0-1 scale to ensure consistency and comparability across evaluations.
4.3. Baselines
The effectiveness of GxVAEs is evaluated by comparing it to two primary baseline models, which are described as follows:
• ExpressionGAN [20]: This previous SOTA model integrates systems biology with molecular design by employing a GAN)con-
ditioned on transcriptomic data. This model autonomously designs molecules with a high probability of inducing a desired
transcriptomic profile. By inputting a gene expression signature of the target state, the model is capable of generating hit
molecules for specific targets without requiring prior annotations of the training compounds.
• TRIOMPHE [21]: This model uses transcriptome profiles to design new molecules targeting specific phenotypes and ligand-
target interactions. It analyzes the correlation between chemically induced and genetically perturbed transcriptome profiles, and
employs a VAE to generate molecules that match the desired profiles.
4.4. Evaluation of ProfileVAE (RQ1)
To demonstrate ProfileVAE’s capability in extracting biological features from transcriptome profiles, we compared the distributions
of input transcriptome profiles with their reconstructed counterparts. Fig.2depicts the transcriptome profile distributions induced
by the molecules “𝐶 𝐻 𝑁𝑂 𝑃”, “𝐶 𝐻 𝑁 𝑂 ”, “𝐶 𝐻 𝑁 𝑂𝑆”, and “𝐶 𝐻 𝑁 𝑆” (shown in yellow). These molecules have
40 80 8 25 39 3 5 13 16 2 6 15 3
molecular weights of 734, 462, 248, and 161, with SMILES lengths of 63, 53, 36, and 15. The figures also display their corresponding
reconstructed profiles (shown in green). The results illustrate that ProfileVAE successfully reconstructed the input transcriptome
profiles across a variety of molecular weights and SMILES lengths. Fig.D.1in the Appendix depicts the average distribution of all
transcriptome profiles in the real set and their corresponding reconstructed profiles. The reconstructed profiles closely approximate
those of the real set, showcasing ProfileVAE’s capability to effectively extract features from transcriptome profiles and validate its
effectiveness in reconstructing profiles based on these features.
Additionally, Fig. D.2 illustrates a positive linear relationship between SMILES lengths and molecular weights, indicating that
longer SMILES strings generally correspond to heavier molecular weights. Figs.3and D.3show the relationship between the mean
square errors (MSE) of reconstructed transcriptome profiles and their respective SMILES lengths and molecular weights. The results
reveal a significant negative correlation between MSE, which gauges the disparity between reconstructed and actual transcriptome
profiles, and both SMILES lengths and molecular weights. This suggests that ProfileVAE effectively captures transcriptome profiles
associated with molecules characterized by longer SMILES strings and molecular weights in the range of [400, 600]. Conversely, due
to limited data availability for molecular weights below 200 and above 600 (about 300 and 100 samples, respectively), the MSE
exhibits signs of instability or increases.
7

C.LiandY.Yamanishi ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104239
Fig.2.RealandreconstructeddistributionoftranscriptomeprofilesgeneratedbyProfileVAE.MWandLenrepresentmolecularweightandSMILESlength,respectively.
(Forinterpretationofthecolorsinthefigure(s),thereaderisreferredtothewebversionofthisarticle.)
Fig.3.CorrelationbetweenthereconstructedtranscriptomeprofilesandSMILESlengthsandmolecularweights.
Furthermore, we performed singular value decomposition (SVD) and principal component analysis (PCA) on both the real tran-
scriptome profiles and their corresponding reconstructed profiles. The 2D and 3D visualization plots are shown in Figs.4, D.4, and
D.5. The results illustrate that the reconstructed transcriptome profile data points exhibit significant overlap with the points from the
real set, visually demonstrating the efficacy of ProfileVAE.
8

C.LiandY.Yamanishi ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104239
Fig.4.Visualizationplotsofallrealandreconstructedtranscriptomeprofiles.
Fig.5.ViolinplotsofpropertyscoresformoleculesfromtherealsetandMolVAE.
Fig.6.DistributionsofmolecularpropertyscoresformoleculesgeneratedbyMolVAE.
9

C.LiandY.Yamanishi ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104239
Table1
Statistics for the dataset and molecules generated by
MolVAE.AvgLen,MaxLen,andMinLenindicatetheaver-
age,maximum,andminimumlengthsoftheSMILESstrings.
Data AvgLen MaxLen MinLen MW
Realset 57 79 10 429
Generation 57 83 10 430
Table2
Comparisonofthetop-kgeneratedmolecules.
Property Data Top-200 Top-400 Top-600 Top-800 Top-1000
Realset 0.81 0.75 0.71 0.67 0.64
QED Generation 0.81 0.75 0.72 0.68 0.65
Realset 0.79 0.66 0.58 0.52 0.47
SA Generation 0.80 0.67 0.58 0.52 0.47
Realset 0.86 0.79 0.75 0.70 0.66
logP Generation 0.86 0.79 0.74 0.70 0.65
Table3
ComparativeevaluationofTRIOMPHEbaselineandGxVAEs.Thevaluesingraycellsindicatemax-
imumvalues.
TargetProtein TRIOMPHE GxVAEs
Validity Uniqueness Novelty Validity Uniqueness Novelty
AKT1 20.9 49.3 100.0 88.0 88.6 100.0
AKT2 21.7 76.0 100.0 89.0 91.0 98.8
AURKB 20.3 74.9 100.0 89.0 93.3 98.8
CTSK 13.3 74.4 100.0 91.0 94.5 98.8
EGFR 13.2 75.8 99.0 89.0 93.3 100.0
HDAC1 25.5 52.2 99.2 78.0 96.2 97.3
MTOR 4.3 86.0 100.0 91.0 93.4 98.8
PIK3CA 10.9 97.2 100.0 92.0 93.5 97.7
SMAD3 26.6 67.7 100.0 86.0 91.9 98.7
TP53 12.2 77.9 100.0 85.0 96.5 98.8
4.5. Evaluation of MolVAE (RQ2)
Fig.E.1in the Appendix displays the change curves for both the reconstruction loss and the ratio of valid molecules generated by
MolVAE. It was observed that as the number of training epochs increased, the reconstruction loss decreased gradually, accompanied
by a gradual increase in the validity of the generated molecules.
Fig.5presents violin plots comparing the QED, SA, and logP scores of molecules from the real set (in blue) and those generated
by MolVAE (in red). The similarity in their distributions suggests that MolVAE generated valid molecules while maintaining consis-
tent intrinsic chemical properties. To further analyze the structural characteristics of generated molecules, Fig.E.2in the Appendix
showcases the top 12 molecules based on the properties from both the real set and MolVAE. The molecules generated by MolVAE
tend to exhibit structures and property scores similar to those in the real set.
Additionally, Table1provides statistics for both the real set and molecules generated by MolVAE. The average, maximum, and
minimum lengths, as well as the average molecular weight of the generated SMILES strings, closely align with those of the real set.
This consistency highlights MolVAE’s effectiveness in learning data distributions of SMILES strings.
Fig.6and Table2depict the distributions of chemical property scores and the top-k generated molecules. The results demonstrate
that MolVAE-generated molecules exhibit highly consistent distributions with the real set across QED, SA, and logP properties. This
illustrates that MolVAE preserves intrinsic property features of SMILES strings during molecule generation.
4.6. Evaluation of GxVAEs (RQ3)
In biochemistry, ligand binding to a target protein alters its activity, triggering a cellular response. Here, we focused on generating
ligand candidate molecules for ten target proteins by utilizing their transcriptome profiles. Knockdown transcriptome profiles were
10

C.LiandY.Yamanishi ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104239
Table4
ComparisonoftheTanimotocoefficientsforthebaselinesandGx-
VAEs.
TargetProtein ExpressionGAN TRIOMPHE GxVAEs
AKT1 0.32 0.42 0.85
AKT2 0.29 0.35 0.43
AURKB 0.36 0.34 0.47
CTSK 0.31 0.29 0.38
EGFR 0.30 0.31 0.74
HDAC1 0.34 0.30 0.55
MTOR 0.39 0.69 0.52
PIK3CA 0.26 0.32 0.35
SMAD3 0.44 0.48 0.98
TP53 0.46 0.53 0.76
used to generate inhibitors for the proteins AKT1, AKT2, AURKB, CTSK, EGFR, HDAC1, MTOR, and PIK3CA, while overexpression
transcriptome profiles were used to generate activators for SMAD3 and TP53.
Table 3 showcases the effectiveness of GxVAEs in generating hit molecules. Note that ExpressionGAN has a limited capacity
to generate valid molecules, the comparison was made solely with the TRIOMPHE baseline. The results reveal that GxVAEs are
three times more effective than TRIOMPHE in generating ligand-like molecules from the transcriptome profiles of the ten target
proteins, achieving a validity rate of at least 78.0% for HDAC1. Moreover, the uniqueness of the molecules generated by GxVAEs
surpasses that of TRIOMPHE, except for PIK3CA (93.5% versus 97.2%). The novelty of GxVAEs (97.7%) is also close to that of
TRIOMPHE.
Table4compares the Tanimoto coefficients of GxVAEs with those of two SOTA models. For each target protein, we sampled 100
SMILES-like strings from its corresponding transcriptome profile. We then computed the Tanimoto coefficient between each generated
sample and the known ligands of the target protein, and recorded the maximum Tanimoto coefficient in the table. A higher Tanimoto
coefficient indicates a higher probability that a generated molecule effectively binds to a target protein. The findings indicate that
GxVAEs produced candidate ligands with markedly higher Tanimoto coefficients across all ten target proteins compared to the two
SOTA models. For example, the Tanimoto coefficient for AKT1 generated by GxVAEs was 2.7 and 2.0 times higher than those of the
baselines.
To visually compare the known ligands with those generated by GxVAEs, we present their top 1 and top 5 molecular structures
in Figs.7and F.1, respectively. The chemical structures of the hit molecules generated by GxVAEs seem to be similar to those of the
known ligands. Overall, GxVAEs are able to produce ligand-like structures in generating hit molecules from transcriptome profiles,
with the biological activity of the generated molecules significantly surpassing the SOTA baselines in terms of the reproducibility of
known ligand structures.
4.7. Case study: therapeutic molecule generation
In disease states, complex combinations of gene abnormalities disrupt normal transcriptome patterns. As a case study, our aim
was to generate therapeutic molecules from transcriptome profiles of real patients. Fig.8outlines the process facilitated by GxVAEs
for therapeutic molecule generation. By aggregating transcriptome profiles from multiple patients with the same disease, we derived
a disease-specific transcriptome profile that captures the transcriptome landscape of the disease. To identify potential therapeutic
candidates, we inverted the disease-specific transcriptome profile (reversal profile). Molecules capable of inducing a transcriptome
pattern similar to this reversal profile are considered potential therapeutics. Subsequently, these disease reversal profiles were input
into GxVAEs to generate candidate therapeutic molecules. The generated molecules, which exhibit structural similarity to approved
drugs for treating the disease, are anticipated to possess therapeutic efficacy. Tanimoto coefficients, reflecting structural similarity to
approved drugs, were utilized to assess the drug-likeness.
We attempted to generate new therapeutic drug candidate molecules for gastric cancer, atopic dermatitis, and Alzheimer’s disease.
We made a comparison between GxVAEs and DRAGONET [54]using identical datasets of patient transcriptome profiles and molecule
chemical structures to ensure a fair evaluation. Fig.9illustrates the therapeutic molecules generated by both methods, alongside their
Tanimoto coefficients relative to approved drugs. Note that each approved drug was associated with 100 SMILES-like strings sampled
from its corresponding disease reversal profile. For example, hydrocortisone (DB00741), a glucocorticoid used for treating atopic
dermatitis, immune disorders, and allergies, achieved a Tanimoto coefficient of 1.0 with molecules generated by GxVAEs using
patient-specific transcriptome profiles for atopic dermatitis. This result highlights GxVAEs’ capability to accurately capture structural
features akin to approved drugs for treating atopic dermatitis. Additionally, GxVAEs produced molecules designed for gastric cancer
and Alzheimer’s disease, and the generated molecules exhibited structural similarities to known approved drugs. This suggests that
GxVAEs hold promise in generating therapeutic molecules with enhanced properties compared to DRAGONET.
11

C.LiandY.Yamanishi ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104239
Fig.7.ComparisonofhitmoleculesgeneratedbyExpressionGANandTRIOMPHEbaselineswiththosebyGxVAEs,focusingspecificallyonmoleculeswiththehighest
Tanimotocoefficientsforcorrespondingknownligands.
Fig.8.GxVAEsfortherapeuticmoleculegeneration.
5. Conclusion
This study introduced GxVAEs, integrating two VAEs—ProfileVAE and MolVAE—to generate hit molecules from transcriptome
profiles. ProfileVAE extracted features from transcriptome profiles, which MolVAE utilized as conditions to generate hit molecules.
Experimental results demonstrated that GxVAEs surpassed current SOTA benchmarks, efficiently producing hit molecules from tran-
scriptome profiles. Moreover, we showcased GxVAEs’ capability to design molecular structures potentially effective in treating various
diseases based on patient-specific disease profiles.
12

C.LiandY.Yamanishi ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104239
Fig.9.TherapeuticmoleculegenerationbyDRAGONETbaselineandGxVAEsforthreediseases.
GxVAEs have two main limitations. First, the diversity of the generated molecules may be limited by the size of the latent space.
If MolVAE uses a fixed latent vector, it could restrict the range of variability in the newly created molecules. Second, the model’s
performance can be affected by the quality and representativeness of the transcriptome profiles used during training, which may
impact the relevance of the generated molecules to real-world disease contexts.
To address these issues in future work, we plan to improve the latent space representation and incorporate a broader range
of diverse and comprehensive transcriptome profiles. Additionally, we aim to validate the efficacy of the candidate therapeutic
molecules generated by GxVAEs in real disease contexts. By overcoming these limitations, we believe that GxVAEs can greatly
enhance the process of generating hit molecules and offer valuable support to chemists and pharmacologists in their research endeav-
ors.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Chen Li:Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Software, Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.Yoshihiro
Yamanishi:Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Software, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the International Research Fellow of Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (Postdoctoral
Fellowships for Research in Japan [Standard]), AMED under Grant Number JP22nk0101111, and JSPS KAKENHI [grant numbers
20H05797, 21K18327].
AppendixA. Variant SMILES
Fig.A.1demonstrates an example production of variant SMILES strings. Generally, a molecular graph has a canonical SMILES string
(shown with the left figure). The numbers and arrows in the figure denote the traversal order of the atoms. Unlike in natural language
processing, the canonical molecule has various SMILES representations (shown as the middle figure) according to different traversal
orders (one example is shown in the right figure) called variant SMILES. However, the same molecular graph can be represented using
these ten variant SMILES strings. Therefore, variant SMILES strings can be produced to improve the pretraining of the generator and
prevent it from learning only a single semantic and syntactic feature.
13

C.LiandY.Yamanishi ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104239
Fig.A.1.ExampleshowingtheproductionofvariantSMILESstrings.
Fig.B.1.AnillustrationoftheapplicationofteacherforcinginaGRUmodel.
Fig.D.1.AveragedistributionofalltranscriptomeprofilesexposedintheMCF7cell.
AppendixB. Teacher forcing
Teacher forcing is commonly employed in the training of machine learning models, especially in the realm of sequence-to-sequence
models like recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and their variants, such as long short-term memory networks (LSTMs) and gated
recurrent units (GRUs). In GxVAEs, the primary purpose of employing teacher forcing is to expedite and stabilize the training process.
14

C.LiandY.Yamanishi ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104239
Fig.D.2.RelationshipbetweenmolecularweightsandSMILESlengths.
Fig.D.3.Relationshipbetweenreconstructedtranscriptomeprofilesandmolecularweights.
This technique involves using the ground truth target output from the training dataset as input for MolVAE during training, rather
than relying solely on MolVAE’s own generated output from the previous time step.
Fig. B.1 provides a visual representation of the application of teacher forcing in a GRU model. In the absence of the teacher
forcing technique, commonly referred to as free-running mode (depicted in Fig.B.1(a)), the predicted token at time step 𝑡is typ-
ically employed as the input for time step 𝑡 +1. However, this approach can lead to challenges when the prediction at time step
𝑡diverges from the label or ground truth at the same time step. Such discrepancies may propagate errors, resulting in subsequent
predictions or generations deviating from the intended direction. Unlike the free-running mode, where the predicted token at time
step 𝑡becomes the input for time step 𝑡 +1, teacher forcing introduces a distinctive approach, as illustrated in Fig.B.1(b). In the
context of teacher forcing, the GRU model is fed with the true or ground truth token at each time step during training, regardless of
the model’s own predictions. For instance, if the GRU model predicts an incorrect token at time step 1(e.g., the atom “c”), differing
from the ground truth (e.g., the atom “o”), teacher forcing uses “o” as the input for the second time step instead of the model’s
prediction.
This technique aims to align the model’s learning process more closely with the intended sequence, thereby enhancing stability
and expediting convergence during training.
15

C.LiandY.Yamanishi ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104239
Fig.D.4.2Dand3DSVDvisualizationplotsofrealandreconstructedtranscriptomeprofiles.
AppendixC. Experimental setup
In this section, we provide details on the computational resources and datasets used for training and evaluating the GxVAEs model.
• Computational Resources:All experiments were conducted using an NVIDIA Tesla T4 GPU with CUDA version 11.4. The model
was implemented in Python version 3.6.10.
• Datasets:The GxVAEs model was trained and validated using a dataset with 13, 554transcriptome profile samples for training
and 200samples for validation, each profile consisting of 978 dimensions.
• Training Time:The training of ProfileVAE required approximately 3 days to complete, while MolVAE was trained in about 6
hours.
• Computational Efficiency: The use of the NVIDIA Tesla T4 GPU enabled efficient processing of the large-scale dataset and
accelerated the training process. CUDA 11.4 provided the necessary support for high-performance computations, ensuring that
the training was completed within a reasonable time frame.
16

C.LiandY.Yamanishi ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104239
Fig.D.4.(continued)
AppendixD. Additional evaluation results of ProfileVAE
Fig.D.1illustrates the average distribution of all transcriptome profiles exposed in the MCF7 cell, reconstructed by ProfileVAE.
The average distribution of reconstructed transcriptome profiles closely overlaps with that of the real transcriptome profiles, thereby
validating the effectiveness of ProfileVAE in feature extraction and reconstruction.
Fig.D.2depicts the relationship between molecular weights and SMILES lengths. The data demonstrates a distinct positive linear
relationship (highlighted by the red line), signifying that as the SMILES representation lengthens, the molecular weight of the molecule
increases accordingly. This finding underscores the direct association between molecular complexity, as indicated by SMILES length,
and molecular weight.
Figs.3(b) and D.3depict the relationship between molecular weights, scaled by factors of 1 and 10, respectively, and the re-
constructed transcriptome profiles. The results in Fig.D.3detail that the MSE of transcriptome profiles exhibits an overall negative
correlation with molecular weights within the range of [200, 600]. Due to the limited amount of data within the molecular weight
17

C.LiandY.Yamanishi ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104239
Fig.D.5.2Dand3DPCAvisualizationplotsofrealandreconstructedtranscriptomeprofiles.
ranges of [0, 100] and [600, 1000], approximately 300 and 100 instances, respectively, their MSE shows instability and tends to
increase.
Figs.D.4and D.5show the SVD and PCA visualization plots of real and reconstructed transcriptome profiles, respectively. The
results indicate that the 2D and 3D data points representing the dimension-reduced reconstructed transcriptome profiles closely
overlap with those of the real transcriptome profiles, demonstrating the effectiveness of ProfileVAE.
AppendixE. Additional evaluation results of MolVAE
Fig.E.1shows the reconstruction loss of the MolVAE and the ratio of valid molecules generated by MolVAE. The brown curve
indicates the losses of MolVAE over the training epochs. The blue curve denotes the ratio of valid molecules generated by MolVAE
with over training epochs. Note that the valid molecules are examined using the RDKit tool.
18

C.LiandY.Yamanishi ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104239
Fig.D.5.(continued)
AppendixF. Additional evaluation results of GxVAEs
For each target protein, we randomly selected 100 SMILES-like strings from its corresponding transcriptome profile. Subsequently,
we calculated the Tanimoto coefficient between each generated sample and the known ligands of the target protein. The top 5
coefficients and their corresponding molecular structures are shown in Fig.F.1.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
[1]C.M.Dobson,etal.,Chemicalspaceandbiology,Nature432(7019)(2004)824–828.
[2]R.P.Hertzberg,A.J.Pope,High-throughputscreening:newtechnologyforthe21stcentury,Curr.Opin.Chem.Biol.4(4)(2000)445–451.
[3]J.W.Scannell,J.Bosley,J.A.Hickman,G.R.Dawson,H.Truebel,G.S.Ferreira,D.Richards,J.M.Treherne,Predictivevalidityindrugdiscovery:whatitis,why
itmattersandhowtoimproveit,Nat.Rev.DrugDiscov.21(12)(2022)915–931.
19

C.LiandY.Yamanishi ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104239
Fig.E.1.ChangecurvesforthereconstructionlossoftherealdatasetandtheratioofvalidmoleculestoallmoleculesgeneratedbyGxVAEs.
Fig.E.2.Top12moleculessortedbypropertyscoresfromtrainingandgeneratedsetsbyMolVAE.
[4]A.Z.Rahman,C.Liu,H.Sturm,A.M.Hogan,R.Davis,P.Hu,S.T.Cardona,Amachinelearningmodeltrainedonahigh-throughputantibacterialscreenincreases
thehitrateofdrugdiscovery,PLoSComput.Biol.18(10)(2022)1–22.
[5]S.Morgan,P.Grootendorst,J.Lexchin,C.Cunningham,D.Greyson,Thecostofdrugdevelopment:asystematicreview,HealthPolicy100(1)(2011)4–17.
[6]B.Shaker,S.Ahmad,J.Lee,C.Jung,D.Na,Insilicomethodsandtoolsfordrugdiscovery,Comput.Biol.Med.137(2021)104851.
[7]A.V.Sadybekov,V.Katritch,Computationalapproachesstreamliningdrugdiscovery,Nature616(7958)(2023)673–685.
[8]K.-K.Mak,Y.-H.Wong,M.R.Pichika,Artificialintelligenceindrugdiscoveryanddevelopment,in:DrugDiscoveryandEvaluation:SafetyandPharmacokinetic
Assays,2023,pp.1–38.
[9]G.L.Guimaraes,B.Sanchez-Lengeling,C.Outeiral,P.L.C.Farias,A.Aspuru-Guzik,Objective-reinforcedgenerativeadversarialnetworks(ORGAN)forsequence
generationmodels,arXivpreprint,arXiv:1705.10843,2017.
[10] N.DeCao,T.Kipf,MolGAN:animplicitgenerativemodelforsmallmoleculargraphs,ArXivpreprint,arXiv:1805.11973,2018.
[11] C.Li,C.Yamanaka,K.Kaitoh,Y.Yamanishi,Transformer-basedobjective-reinforcedgenerativeadversarialnetworktogeneratedesiredmolecules,in:Proceedings
oftheThirty-FirstInternationalJointConferenceonArtificialIntelligence(IJCAI-22),2022,pp.3884–3890.
[12] A.F.Oliveira,J.L.DaSilva,M.G.Quiles,Molecularpropertypredictionandmoleculardesignusingasupervisedgrammarvariationalautoencoder,J.Chem.Inf.
Model.62(4)(2022)817–828.
20

C.LiandY.Yamanishi ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104239
Fig.E.2.(continued)
[13] O.Dollar,N.Joshi,D.A.Beck,J.Pfaendtner,Attention-basedgenerativemodelsfordenovomoleculardesign,Chem.Sci.12(24)(2021)8362–8372.
[14] M.J.Kusner,B.Paige,J.M.Hernández-Lobato,Grammarvariationalautoencoder,in:ProceedingsoftheInternationalConferenceonMachineLearning,PMLR,
2017,pp.1945–1954.
[15] W.Jin,R.Barzilay,T.Jaakkola,Junctiontreevariationalautoencoderformoleculargraphgeneration,in:ProceedingsoftheInternationalConferenceonMachine
Learning,PMLR,2018,pp.2323–2332.
[16] J.Born,M.Manica,A.Oskooei,J.Cadow,G.Markert,M.R.Martínez,PaccMannRL:denovogenerationofhit-likeanticancermoleculesfromtranscriptomic
dataviareinforcementlearning,iScience24(4)(2021)102269.
[17] J.Mun,G.Choi,B.Lim,Aguideforbioinformaticians:omics-baseddrugdiscoveryforprecisiononcology,DrugDiscov.Today25(11)(2020)1897–1904.
[18] M.H.Asyali,D.Colak,O.Demirkaya,M.S.Inan,Geneexpressionprofileclassification:areview,Curr.Bioinform.1(1)(2006)55–73.
[19] M.Kang,E.Ko,T.B.Mersha,Aroadmapformulti-omicsdataintegrationusingdeeplearning,Brief.Bioinform.23(1)(2022)1–16.
[20] O.Méndez-Lucio,B.Baillif,D.-A.Clevert,D.Rouquié,J.Wichard,Denovogenerationofhit-likemoleculesfromgeneexpressionsignaturesusingartificial
intelligence,Nat.Commun.11(1)(2020)10.
21

C.LiandY.Yamanishi ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104239
Fig.F.1.Top5Tanimotocoefficientsbetweenknownligandsand100generatedmoleculesproducedbyGxVAEs.
[21] K.Kaitoh,Y.Yamanishi,TRIOMPHE:transcriptome-basedinferenceandgenerationofmoleculeswithdesiredphenotypesbymachinelearning,J.Chem.Inf.
Model.61(9)(2021)4303–4320.
[22] C.Li,Y.Yamanishi,GxVAEs:twojointVAEsgeneratehitmoleculesfromgeneexpressionprofiles,in:ProceedingsoftheAAAIConferenceonArtificialIntelligence,
vol.38,2024,pp.13455–13463.
[23] D.Weininger,SMILES:achemicallanguageandinformationsystem.1.Introductiontomethodologyandencodingrules,J.Chem.Inf.Comput.Sci.28(1)(1988)
31–36.
[24] D.E.Manolopoulos,P.W.Fowler,Moleculargraphs,pointgroups,andfullerenes,J.Chem.Phys.96(10)(1992)7603–7614.
[25] O.Ganea,L.Pattanaik,C.Coley,R.Barzilay,K.Jensen,W.Green,T.Jaakkola,GeoMol:torsionalgeometricgenerationofmolecular3Dconformerensembles,
Adv.NeuralInf.Process.Syst.34(2021)13757–13769.
[26] J.Arús-Pous,A.Patronov,E.J.Bjerrum,C.Tyrchan,J.-L.Reymond,H.Chen,O.Engkvist,SMILES-baseddeepgenerativescaffolddecoratorforde-novodrug
design,J.Cheminform.12(2020)1–18.
[27] F.Grisoni,M.Moret,R.Lingwood,G.Schneider,Bidirectionalmoleculegenerationwithrecurrentneuralnetworks,J.Chem.Inf.Model.60(3)(2020)1175–1183.
[28] H.Tang,C.Li,S.Jiang,H.Yu,S.Kamei,Y.Yamanishi,Y.Morimoto,EarlGAN:anenhancedactor–criticreinforcementlearningagent-drivenganfordenovo
drugdesign,PatternRecognit.Lett.175(2023)45–51.
[29] C.Li,Y.Yamanishi,TenGAN:puretransformerencodersmakeanefficientdiscreteGANfordenovomoleculargeneration,in:ProceedingsoftheInternational
ConferenceonArtificialIntelligenceandStatistics,PMLR,2024,pp.361–369.
[30] C. Li, Y. Yamanishi, SpotGAN: a reverse-transformer gan generates scaffold-constrained molecules with property optimization, in: ECML-PKDD, 2023,
pp.3884–3890.
[31] L.Huang,H.Zhang,T.Xu,K.-C.Wong,MDM:moleculardiffusionmodelfor3Dmoleculegeneration,in:ProceedingsoftheAAAIConferenceonArtificial
Intelligence,vol.37,2023,pp.5105–5112.
[32] H.Gong,Q.Liu,S.Wu,L.Wang,Text-guidedmoleculegenerationwithdiffusionlanguagemodel,in:ProceedingsoftheAAAIConferenceonArtificialIntelligence,
vol.38,2024,pp.109–117.
[33] N.O’Boyle,A.Dalke,DeepSMILES:anadaptationofsmilesforuseinmachine-learningofchemicalstructures,ChemRxiv(2018).
[34] A.S.Bhadwal,K.Kumar,N.Kumar,GenSMILES:anenhancedvalidityconsciousrepresentationforinversedesignofmolecules,Knowl.-BasedSyst.268(2023)
110429.
22

C.LiandY.Yamanishi ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104239
Fig.F.1.(continued)
[35] M.Krenn,Q.Ai,S.Barthel,N.Carson,A.Frei,N.C.Frey,P.Friederich,T.Gaudin,A.A.Gayle,K.M.Jablonka,etal.,SELFIESandthefutureofmolecularstring
representations,Patterns3(10)(2022).
[36] E.Noutahi,C.Gabellini,M.Craig,J.S.Lim,P.Tossou,GottabeSAFE:anewframeworkformoleculardesign,Digit.Discov.3(4)(2024)796–804.
[37] H.Dai,B.Dai,L.Song,Discriminativeembeddingsoflatentvariablemodelsforstructureddata,in:ProceedingsoftheInternationalConferenceonMachine
Learning,PMLR,2016,pp.2702–2711.
[38] S.Pölsterl,C.Wachinger,Adversariallearnedmoleculargraphinferenceandgeneration,in:ECML-PKDD,2021,pp.173–189.
[39] V.G.Satorras,E.Hoogeboom,M.Welling,E(n)equivariantgraphneuralnetworks,in:ProceedingsoftheInternationalConferenceonMachineLearning,PMLR,
2021,pp.9323–9332.
[40] J.Zhao,Q.Feng,W.-Q.Wei,Integrationofomicsandphenotypicdataforprecisionmedicine,in:SystemsMedicine,Springer,2022,pp.19–35.
[41] S.Morganti,P.Tarantino,E.Ferraro,P.D’Amico,B.A.Duso,G.Curigliano,Nextgenerationsequencing(NGS):arevolutionarytechnologyinpharmacogenomics
andpersonalizedmedicineincancer,in:TranslationalResearchandOnco-OmicsApplicationsintheEraofCancerPersonalGenomics,2019,pp.9–30.
[42] R.Pereira,J.Oliveira,M.Sousa,Bioinformaticsandcomputationaltoolsfornext-generationsequencinganalysisinclinicalgenetics,J.Clin.Med.9(1)(2020)
132.
[43] B.Turanli,K.Karagoz,G.Gulfidan,R.Sinha,A.Mardinoglu,K.Y.Arga,Anetwork-basedcancerdrugdiscovery:fromintegratedmulti-omicsapproachesto
precisionmedicine,Curr.Pharm.Des.24(32)(2018)3778–3790.
[44] B.Chen,L.Garmire,D.F.Calvisi,M.-S.Chua,R.K.Kelley,X.Chen,Harnessingbig‘omics’dataandAIfordrugdiscoveryinhepatocellularcarcinoma,Nat.Rev.
Gastroenterol.Hepatol.17(4)(2020)238–251.
[45] K.Cho,LearningphraserepresentationsusingRNNencoder-decoderforstatisticalmachinetranslation,in:Proceedingsofthe2014ConferenceonEmpirical
MethodsinNaturalLanguageProcessing(EMNLP),2014,pp.1724–1734.
[46] C.Yan,J.Yang,H.Ma,S.Wang,J.Huang,Moleculesequencegenerationwithrebalancedvariationalautoencoderloss,J.Comput.Biol.30(1)(2023)82–94.
[47] J.M.Joyce,Kullback-Leiblerdivergence,in:InternationalEncyclopediaofStatisticalScience,Springer,2011,pp.720–722.
[48] Q.Duan,C.Flynn,M.Niepel,M.Hafner,J.L.Muhlich,N.F.Fernandez,A.D.Rouillard,C.M.Tan,E.Y.Chen,T.R.Golub,etal.,LINCScanvasbrowser:interactive
webapptoquery,browseandinterrogateLINCSl1000geneexpressionsignatures,NucleicAcidsRes.42(W1)(2014)W449–W460.
[49] Z.Wang,C.D.Monteiro,K.M.Jagodnik,N.F.Fernandez,G.W.Gundersen,A.D.Rouillard,S.L.Jenkins,A.S.Feldmann,K.S.Hu,M.G.McDermott,etal.,Extraction
andanalysisofsignaturesfromthegeneexpressionOmnibusbythecrowd,Nat.Commun.7(1)(2016)12846.
23

C.LiandY.Yamanishi ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104239
Fig.F.1.(continued)
[50] G.Landrum,Rdkitdocumentation,Release1(1–79)(2013)4.
[51] Y.Kwon,J.Lee,MolFinder:anevolutionaryalgorithmfortheglobaloptimizationofmolecularpropertiesandtheextensiveexplorationofchemicalspaceusing
smiles,J.Cheminform.13(2021)1–14.
[52] P.Ertl,A.Schuffenhauer,Estimationofsyntheticaccessibilityscoreofdrug-likemoleculesbasedonmolecularcomplexityandfragmentcontributions,J.
Cheminform.1(2009)1–11.
[53] D.Rogers,M.Hahn,Extended-connectivityfingerprints,J.Chem.Inf.Model.50(5)(2010)742–754.
[54] C.Yamanaka,S.Uki,K.Kaitoh,M.Iwata,Y.Yamanishi,Denovodrugdesignbasedonpatientgeneexpressionprofilesviadeeplearning,Mol.Inform.(2023).
24

