ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104240
ContentslistsavailableatScienceDirect
Artificial Intelligence
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/artint
Chimeric U-Net – Modifying the standard U-Net towards
✩
explainability
Kenrick Schulzea, Felix Pepperta, Christof Schütteb, Vikram Sunkaraa,∗
aExplainable AI for Biology, Zuse Institute Berlin, Takustraße 7, 14195, Berlin, Germany
bDepartment Mathematics of Complex Systems, Zuse Institute Berlin, Takustraße 7, 14195, Berlin, Germany
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords: Healthcare guided by semantic segmentation has the potential to improve our quality of life
U-Net through early and accurate disease detection. Convolutional Neural Networks, especially the U-
Invertible decoder Net-based architectures, are currently the state-of-the-art learning-based segmentation methods
Sema nticsegmentation
and have given unprecedented performances. However, their decision-making processes are still
Classembeddings
an active field of research. In order to reliably utilize such methods in healthcare, explainability
of how the segmentation was performed is mandated. To date, explainability is studied and
applied heavily in classification tasks. In this work, we propose the ChimericU-Net, a U-Net
architecture with an invertible decoder unit, that inherently brings explainability into semantic
segmentation tasks. We find that having the restriction of an invertible decoder does not hinder
the performance of the segmentation task. However, the invertible decoder helps to disentangle
the class information in the latent space embedding and to construct meaningful saliency maps.
Furthermore, we found that with a simple k-Nearest-Neighbours classifier, we could predict the
Intersection over Union scores of unseen data, demonstrating that the latent space, constructed
by the ChimericU-Net, encodes an interpretable representation of the segmentation quality.
Explainability is an emerging field, and in this work, we propose an alternative approach, that
is, rather than building tools for explaining a generic architecture, we propose constraints on the
architecture which induce explainability. With this approach, we could peer into the architecture
to reveal its class correlations and local contextual dependencies, taking an insightful step towards
trustworthy and reliable AI. Code to build and utilize the Chimeric U-Net is made available under:
https://github .com /kenrickschulze /Chimeric -UNet -–Half -invertible -UNet -in -Pytorch
1. Introduction
Deep learning (DL) has become ubiquitous in medical diagnosis. In particular, the sub-field of semantic segmentation has the
potential to make significant contributions to human well-being through image guided diagnosis of severe diseases[1]. In semantic
segmentation tasks, each pixel of an image is tasked to be classified as one of the prescribed set of classes, for example, detecting
and localizing cancer in MRI scans of patients[2],[3]. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are the main work-horse in semantic
✩ This project was funded by the Berlin Institute for the Foundations of Learning and Data (BIFOLD) (Project BIFOLD-BZML 01IS18037H) and the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft(DFG,GermanResearchFoundation)undertheGermany’sExcellenceStrategy–TheBerlinMathematicsResearchCenterMATH+(EXC-
2046/1projectID:390685689).
* Correspondingauthor.
E-mailaddress:sunkara@zib.de(V.Sunkara).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2024.104240
Received 8 November 2022; Received in revised form 6 October 2024; Accepted 18 October 2024
Availableonline30October2024
0004-3702/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

K.Schulze,F.Peppert,C.Schütteetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104240
segmentation problems, in which features are learnt from data, embracing the ability to find novel features beyond our traditional
hand-crafted features[4]. This learning based feature finding leads to CNNs being “black-boxes”, as their decision making process
lacks transparency and interpretability in many applications[5]. However, in order to prescribe DL aided healthcare to people, trust
in predictions and how they were made is imperative[6].
In 2015, Ronneberger et al. introduced a variant on the classical encoder-decoder CNN architecture that included skip connections
between respective blocks of the encoder-decoder, which they named the U-Net[7]. The U-Net was originally designed for the seg-
mentation tasks of biomedical datasets, but also found application in areas like autonomous driving [8],[9]. Many modifications of
the U-Net have been proposed, each driven to exploit structures in particular datasets, especially in the field of biomedical imag-
ing[10],[11]. However, these architectures are still black-boxes and post-hoc analyses need to be performed to explain their decision
making processes. Typically, these explanations are derived by investigating locally the architecture’s gradients. Explainabilityis still
in its infancy for the U-Net and is an active field of research. To date, there are only a few options for Explainable AI (XAI) in semantic
segmentation tasks[12],[13],[14].
XAI emerged out of the need to explain how and why a classification task reaches its prediction. In mathematical nomenclature, XAI
is the study and approximation of the derivative of the DNN with respect to the prediction. The broadest grouping of XAI approaches is
differentiated into globaland localexplanations. Global methods focus on the average or expected behaviourof the model concerning
the provided dataset or by finding prototypical inputs. This is used to detect biases[13], highlight feature importance[15], extract
knowledge [5], or capture inter-class relationships [13], [16]. In clinical practice where the model’s prediction may alter patient
treatment, the decision making process has to be revealed for each prediction. Hence, local explanations are provided by highlighting
areas within the input the models decision was based on[5].
Most XAI approaches for CNNs can be divided into two subgroups, namely perturbation-based [17], [18] and backpropaga-
tion/gradient-based approaches[15],[19],[20],[21]. In practice, the gradients are computed with respect to the activations of the
latent space. We can state the core XAI question in classification tasks as follows:
(XAI 𝛼) – Which region in the source contributed to that particular prediction?
In gradient-based approaches, this question is answered by studying saliency maps, that is the derivative of the prediction w.r.t.
the source, which highlights regions in the source, that induce strong derivatives in the prediction. In practice, those maps are, for
example, superimposed directly onto the input[19]or collapsed with the target activations beforehand[15].
However, in semantic segmentation, the (XAI 𝛼) question needs to also incorporate spatial information into the prediction. To do
this, Vinogradova et al. proposed to sum all pixel-wise class scores of interest in the prediction and evaluate the derivative of this
scalar with respect to the source, which is currently the most cited XAI approach for semantic segmentation tasks[12].
Inspired by gradient-based XAI analysis, we propose a modification/constraint to incorporate the XAI motivated gradients into
architectures. In particular, we present the ChimericU-Net, which is the standard U-Net with an invertible decoder unit, i.e. a
continuous invertible decoder map. This invertibility restriction on the decoder implies that the architecture:
I: has a continuous-differentiable mapping between the target space and the latent space,
II: has a simple mathematical form for the derivatives of the latent space w.r.t.the target space and vice versa,
III: has the ability to remove redundant information inside the non-invertible encoder, giving a concise latent representation.
Furthermore, by only considering invertibility to the latent space and not all the way back to the input space, we focus only on the
features learned by the architecture, rather than the full feature space of the input.
Exploiting the invertibility of the decoder of the ChimericU-Nets,in this work, we study a novel XAI question:
(XAI 𝛽) – What is the sensitivity of the latent space w.r.t. the changes in the target prediction?
Without loss of generality, we can think of the question (XAI 𝛼) as a tool for studying the sensitivity of the architecture, and (XAI 𝛽)
as a tool to study its specificity, we will derive and explore this in the later sections of this paper. In this work, we study explainability
by studying the learned embedding of the XAI questions given above. With these embeddings, we aim for a global understanding
through the internal representation of the dataset in the architectures, and also the local understanding through saliency maps of
individual data points.
In this work, we first demonstrate how making the decoder invertible does not hinder the network in performing semantic segmen-
tation tasks. Then, we show how using the invertibility of the decoder enables XAI analysis, such as disentangled class information in
the latent space embedding, statistical predictions of unseen data, and lastly, constructing saliency maps. The paper is structured as
follows: In Section2we begin by introducing the ChimericU-Netand presenting the mathematical framework for the architecture and
of the subsequent XAI analysis. In Section3, we present the numerical experimental setup that was used to understand the properties
of the ChimericU-Net. In Section4, we present the results of how the ChimericU-Netcompares to other methods on two medical
segmentation datasets. We perform XAI analysis on the medical datasets for new insights through the XAI analysis mentioned above.
Lastly, in Section5, we discuss the limitations, impact, and future research questions in regards to the ChimericU-Netapproach.
2

K.Schulze,F.Peppert,C.Schütteetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104240
Fig.1.TheChimericU-NetSchematic:non-invertibleencoderconnectedoverskipconnectiontoaninvertibledecoder.
2. Background
2.1. Notation and naming conventions
The following are core notations of this paper: The integer product 𝐻×𝑊 denotes the height and width of the images. The
integer 𝐶 denotes the number of class/target channels. The integer 𝐷denotes the number of channels in the input signal/image. We
use 𝐿 ∈ℕfor the number of layers, we index each layer by 𝑙∈{1, … , 𝐿}. The operators of the architecture act on tensors, for which
we use for brevity bold notations, e.g. x, for general tensors whose dimensions should be determined in context of its appearance.
Furthermore, for a tensor x, we denote the splitting,which inherently only acts on the channel dimension of the tensor, as
[ ]
𝑥
x∶= 𝑥1 , andviceversa𝑥 1∶=[x] 1and𝑥 2∶=[x] 2,
2
for when we concatenatetwo tensors into a single tensor and when we want to extract the first or second split of the tensor, respectively.
We propose this tensor like notation, which is notably unconventional, so that later in the article we can describe the entire decoder
in a single equation. In regards to naming conventions, we interchangeably use “target” and “segmentation” for easy reading.
2.2. The architecture
We first describe the steps of the ChimericU-Net(see Fig.1) in plain language and proceed to reiterate the steps formally using
mathematical nomenclature. To begin, the Chimeric U-Net consists of two sub-units connected by skip connections: the non-invertible
encoderand the invertible decoder. The invertibility of the decoder fixes the dimensionality of the skip connections, which is determined
by the number of target classes and the dimensions of the image. The encoder is non-invertible and is free to be modelled to the data
of interest, with a constraint to contribute the prescribed dimensionality of the skip connections. Given the encoder is specific to the
data, we state the specifics of the encoder in the numerical experiments, and from here on only focus on describing the invertible
decoder.
Observing the invertible decoder in Fig.1(highlighted with green background), we see that the input to a layer in the decoder is
the concatenation of the corresponding encoder layer output and the upsampled output of the layer below. The dimensions of these
two tensors are the same, therefore, we concatenate them in the channel dimension and then pass it through the operations of that
layer. In particular, in these middle layers, the input tensor goes through a sequence of simple additive coupling layersfrom Normalising
Flows[22]. Those additive coupling layers are in essence transforming the features in a continuous and invertible fashion. After this,
the output tensor is sent to the layer above via the invertible learnable upsampler[23], which rearranges the pixels of the layer from,
for example, 𝐶×𝐻×𝑊 to 𝐶∕4 ×2𝐻×2𝐶, in order to alter the dimensionality of their input. Invertible downsampling filters are
the adjoint operator of the exponential of the orthogonal skew-symmetric matrices. In that, rows when reordered into filters and
convolving with an appropriate stride act as orthogonal convolutions. Since the operator is orthogonal and the involved dimensions
are finite, then its inverse, i.e. the invertible upsampling filter, is just the adjoint operator. Hence, all operations in the decoder of the
ChimericU-Netare inherently invertible. This decoder layer design is that of the Invertible U-Netwhich was introduced by Etmann
et al.[23].
3

K.Schulze,F.Peppert,C.Schütteetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104240
The first and the last layers of the decoder are exceptions, that is, after the additive coupling layers of the first layer (𝑙=1)an
inverse discrete wavelet transform(iDWT) is applied to the output tensor, reducing the dimensionality down to the target dimensions.
Lastly, the last layer (𝑙=𝐿) does not receive any input from a layer below, therefore, simply passes the skip connection directly
through to the layer above via the upsampler.
In summary, the decoder is rearranging-, concatenating-, and continuously deforming the points from the skip connections to the
segmentation. This gives us a unique correspondence between the Cartesian product of the skip connections and the segmentation.
We now present the steps of the decoder unit with mathematical nomenclature.
We begin by introducing the notation for the sets of interest. We denote the input image (source) set by ⊂[0, 1]𝐷×𝐻 ∑×𝑊 , containing
a stack of 𝐷image channels of dimension 𝐻×𝑊. We define our target (segmentation) set by ⊂{y∈[0, 1]𝐶×𝐻×𝑊 ∶ 𝑐y[𝑐, ⋅, ⋅] =1},
stack of 𝐶 classes each of shape 𝐻×𝑊, where the sum over the classes is equal to 1for each coordinate in 𝐻×𝑊. In addition to
the input-and target sets, we have the set of skip connections, which we denote by,
( )
⊂ ⨁𝐿−1 ℝ2𝑙𝐶×𝐻 2𝑙×𝑊 2𝑙 ⨁ ℝ2𝐿+1𝐶× 2𝐻 𝐿× 2𝑊 𝐿. (2.1)
𝑙=1
For z∈and 𝑙∈{1, … , 𝐿}, we denote to the 𝑙𝑡ℎ skip connection by 𝑧 𝑙, i.e. z∶=(𝑧 1, … , 𝑧 𝐿).
Using these three sets, (, , ), the ChimericU-Netis defined as the mappings:
←←←←←←Φ→←← ←←←←←←→Ψ←← , (2.2)
where Φis the non-invertible encoder function and Ψis the invertible decoder function.
We recall, the encoder function, Φ ∶ →, is free to be chosen to exploit the specific features of the dataset to be studied.
However, the map Ψ ∶ → is a fixed nested function, with the evaluation of an element z∈given by,
⎛⎡ 𝑧 ⎤⎞
Ψ(z)∶=iDWT⎜ ⎜⎢ ⎢𝜂 ◦𝜓 ([ 1 𝑧 2 ]) ⎥ ⎥⎟ ⎟, (2.3)
⎝⎣ 1 1 𝜂 ◦𝜓 ([…]) ⎦⎠
2 2
where the last term in the nesting is 𝑧 𝐿.
The invertible decoder function Ψ, (2.3), is constituted of three key functions: the inverse discrete wavelet transform, the learnable
invertible upsampling operators (𝜂), and lastly, the normalising flow units (𝜓). In particular, for a layer 𝑙 of the ChimericU-Net,
∙ ∙
the learnable invertible upsampling operator is given by the map,
𝜂 𝑙∶ℝ2𝑙+2𝐶× 2𝑙𝐻 +1× 2𝑊 𝑙+1 ⟶ℝ2𝑙𝐶×𝐻 2𝑙×𝑊 2𝑙, (2.4)
which preserves the total number of elements in the mapping from the domain to the range [23]. The normalising flow of layer 𝑙is
given by,
𝜓 𝑙(x,𝑚)∶=𝑓 𝑙1◦𝑓 𝑙2◦⋯◦𝑓 𝑙𝑚−1◦𝑓 𝑙𝑚 (x), (2.5)
a composition of 𝑚 ∈ℕ ≥2additive coupling layers of 𝑓∙, given by,
𝑙
([ ]) [ ]
𝑥 𝑥
𝑓 𝑙∙ 𝑥1 ∶= 𝑥 1+𝐹 (𝑙2 ,∙)⊛𝑥 . (2.6)
2 2
For brevity, we omit specifying 𝑚in the general representation of 𝜓 in (2.3).
With the definitions above, we can define the inverse of Ψ, mapping points from the segmentation back into the skip connections,
as follows: for y∈,
(
Ψ−1(y)∶= [𝜓−1(DWT(y))] , (2.7)
1 1
[𝜓−1◦𝜂−1([𝜓−1(DWT(y))])] )] ,
2 1 1 2 1
[𝜓−1◦𝜂−1([𝜓−1◦𝜂−1([𝜓−1(DWT(y))]] )] )] ,
3 2 2 1 1 2 2 1
⋮
)
𝜂−1 (…) ,
𝐿−1
where the inverse of the normalising flows is given by,
𝜓 𝑙−1(x,𝑚)∶=(𝑓 𝑙𝑚 )−1◦⋯◦(𝑓 𝑙1)−1(x), (2.8)
with
([ ]) [ ]
𝑥𝑥 𝑥 2+𝐹 𝑥(𝑙,∙)⊛𝑥
(𝑓 𝑙∙)−1 1 ∶= 1 . (2.9)
2 1
Lastly, the inverse of the learnable invertible upsampling function becomes an invertible downsampling function,
4

K.Schulze,F.Peppert,C.Schütteetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104240
Fig.2.Cartoon. A sub-manifold  𝑍around the point 𝑧 𝑦. Three other points, coloured yellow, green and cyan, are pull-backs of 𝑦after perturbation with the function
Δ𝑐to the class 𝑐∈{1, 2, 3}. The arrows are pull-back gradients for 𝑦and class 𝑐pointing to 𝑧 𝑦. Approximate direction to travel to reach 𝑧 𝑦from the perturbed state
𝑧 Δ𝑐𝑦. (For interpretation of the colours in the figure(s), the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
𝜂 𝑙−1∶ℝ2𝑙𝐶×𝐻 2𝑙×𝑊 2𝑙 ⟶ℝ2𝑙+2𝐶× 2𝑙𝐻 +1× 2𝑊 𝑙+1. (2.10)
Remark 2.1. In practice, we apply asoftmaxoperation after theiDWTto satisfy the probability constraint of the elements in the
target set. This makes Ψ non-invertible on the whole range , however, we are strictly interested in the subset of the target set,
Ψ◦Φ() ⊂, on which Ψis invertible, which here on in we denote by †. We treat this set as the range of the architecture, and its
latent space is the focus of this work.
The invertibility of the decoder is a tool for bringing explainability to the U-Net. With this map, we can explain the sensitivity
and the computational reasoning behind the predicted segmentation of the architecture. In the following section, we derive how the
invertible decoder can be used for explainability.
2.3. Latent space
The ChimericU-Net constructs a latent space in its skip connections, we interpret  as a multi-resolution latent space of the
elements of . In general, studying latent spaces in imaging based tasks is an active field of research; the main focus is put on con-
structing meaningful latent representations of the input data for classification-and generative tasks[24]. However, in the particular
case of semantic segmentation tasks, the inability to untangle the multiple segmentation classes of the target in the latent space pose
a challenge. That is, given the target yis a multi-class tensor, then each point z=Ψ−1(y)has entangled information of all the classes
and pixels of y; making it hard to naturally partition w.r.t. .
An approach to disentangle the classes has been the use of saliency maps[19]. In brief, saliency maps are heatmaps that high-
light pixels, which contributed most to the prediction score of the target class. So far, they have been predominantly applied in
image classification tasks rather than image segmentation. Probably, the most well-known of such gradient-based saliency maps is
Grad-CAM [15] with all its recent modifications [25], [20], [26]. Grad-CAM provides visual explanations for CNN predictions of
a convolutional layer (usually the last is chosen) within the network by assigning a relevance score to each pixel. The relevance
score is computed by collapsing the activations maps of the target convolutional layer, weighted by the respective gradients. In Grad-
CAM, each channel is weighted by the same average gradient score, whereas in a more recent modification, namely HiResCAM, the
Hadamard productof the feature maps with the respective gradients is taken before collapsing them[25]. Saliency maps are an active
field of research to explain Neural Network decisions. However, their evaluations, which are generally based on human interpretation
[25],[27],[28],[5], are a topic of ongoing scientific debate[29],[30],[31],[32],[5].
We borrow concepts from Grad-CAM to help create a class-deconvolved latent space over the skip connection of the
ChimericU-Net. The invertibility and the continuity of the decoder map facilitates the computation of the pull-back of points of
the target space onto the latent space, but more importantly, we also gain a natural pull-back of the tangents in † to tangents in .
That is, given an element y∈†and a class 𝑐∈{1, … , 𝐶}, we define an average gradient of the pixels of 𝑦being predicted to class
𝑐by
∑𝜕Ψ−1(y)
t y,𝑐∶= 𝑤 y,𝑖,𝑐, (2.11)
𝜕y𝑖,𝑐
𝑖
where 𝑖 ∈{1, … , 𝐻×𝑊} is an indexing of pixels and 𝑤 y,𝑖 an importance weighting of the 𝑖𝑡ℎ pixel in y to class 𝑐. If we denote
𝑧 𝑦∈as the corresponding element satisfying Ψ(𝑧 y) =y, and †is a manifold, then for each pixel 𝑖and class 𝑐, the partial derivative
𝜕Ψ−1(y)∕𝜕y𝑖,𝑐∈ℝ𝑑𝑖𝑚() describes the sensitivity of 𝑧 with respect to the 𝑖𝑡ℎ pixel predicted as class 𝑐. Then, we take the weighted
y
average over all pixels in the class of interest to construct an average sensitivity of 𝑧 with respect to class 𝑐,(2.11).
y
5

K.Schulze,F.Peppert,C.Schütteetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104240
Using the pull-back function, Ψ−1, we define a new latent space with untangled channels as follows:
 ∶={t y,𝑐|y∈Ψ◦Φ()and𝑐∈{1,…,𝐶}}. (2.12)
Let us consider a simple example to gain intuition into what the elements of the set above can represent. As from before, let 𝑧 be
y
the pull-back of a point y(see Fig.2). Let Δ𝑐(y)be a small perturbation of y, for example, a decrease in the prediction of class 𝑐.
We pull-back Δ𝑐(y)to 𝑧 using the pull-back Ψ−1. Then, the difference vector, 𝑧 y−𝑧 Δ𝑐(y), is a coarse first order approximation
Δ𝑐(y)
of t y,𝑐, that is, the vector pointing from 𝑧 to 𝑧 y. Such a directional vector can be constructed for each class 𝑐, (coloured arrows
Δ𝑐(y)
in Fig.2). It is not intuitive why a set of such tangent-like vectors, t, should give a good latent space. Nevertheless, we will show
∙
through numerical experimental that   is a meaningful latent space, as it can be used to build saliency, predict functionals, like
Intersection over Union (IoU), and more surprisingly, qualify unseen test data.
3. Methods
We performed numerical experiments to understand the ChimericU-Net,which consists of a non-invertible encoder and an in-
vertible decoder, in comparison to the standard (fully non-invertible) U-Net and the fully invertible U-Net. Furthermore, we study
the latent space induced in the ChimericU-Netand investigate its significance and impact. The following are the sub-modules used
to construct the numerical experiments presented in the results.
3.1. Architecture models
We constructed three architectures: the standard U-Net (sU-Net), the invertible U-Net (iU-Net), and the ChimericU-Net. We
modified the architectures of the standard- and the invertible U-Net, such that, the encoder of the sU-Net and the decoder of the
iU-Net matched with the encoder and decoder of the ChimericU-Net,respectively. We present the detailed model representations in
Appendix S-VI Fig. S-1.
The architecture of the sU-Net was based on the work by Ronneberger et al. [7]. We modified their architecture in two ways:
firstly, we expanded the input dimensionality to match the input channels with the output channels, which was done with a standard
2D convolution; secondly, we passed half the channels across the skip connection and passed the other half down to the successive
layer, in contrast to [7], in which all channels were passed to both the skip connections and the layer below. Other than these changes,
we used standard 2D convolutions with stride of two, kernel size of 3, and padding of one, to retain the spatial dimensions. Each
convolution was followed by a Leaky ReLU with a negative slope of 0.01 and group normalisation[33]. Group normalization was
chosen over batch normalization to stabilize the training of the invertible components[23].
The core of the iU-Net was based on the work by Etmann et al.[23]. Two modifications weremade to the original architecture
proposed, firstly we replaced the first and last non-invertible layer of the encoder and decoder in the architecture, with theDWTand
iDWT, respectively, and secondly, to match the input and output channels, we inflated the input channels and set them to zeros prior
to the DWT. Given the convolutions in the iU-Net only act on half the channels, we increased the number of additive coupling layers
to four, to keep the total number of parameters in the architectures comparable.
The ChimericU-Netis the combination of the encoder of the modified sU-Net and the decoder of the modified iU-Net. Once again,
to match the overall number of parameters between the architectures, we reduced the number of additive coupling layers in the
decoder units to be two. Descriptions of the models are given in Appendix S-VI.
All the U-Nets were build to have a depth of four. The architectures were implemented inPyTorchv1.9 [34]. We used the Cross
Entropy Lossfunction from the package as the loss function, furthermore, we used the Adam optimiser and trained with a learning
rate of 10−4. We chose the model with the smallest loss on the respective validation set. The training was performed on a Nvidia
Tesla P100-SXM2 and the subsequent analyses on an Intel Xeon Gold 6246 CPU.
3.2. Datasets
We evaluate the U-Nets on two publicly available Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) datasets: The Multimodal Brain Tumor
Segmentation Challenge 2017 (BraTS), and the Zuse InstituteBerlin’s curated OsteoarthritisInitiative dataset 2018 (OAI ZIB).
BraTS[35],[36],[37]: The dataset contains densely annotated low grade gliomas(LGG) and high grade glioblastomas(HGG).
For each patient: a T1 weighted, a post-contrast T1-weighted, a T2-weighted, and a FLAIRchannel was available. Unlike other BraTS
challenges, the 2017 edition contains only four target classes, namely: background, edema (ED), non-enhancing tumor (NET), and
enhancing tumor (ET). The performance analysis was done for all classes, and also performed the analysis on the post-hoc merged
class tumor core, which is the combination of ET and NET. The segmentation task was performed on 2D slices, consequently, 2D slices
(240×240 pxls) of the 3D volumes were extracted. This was done by sampling three different slices from the inner 30% of each MRI
scan. We chose a batch size of eight and chose to train for a maximum of 350 epochs. The data was split into five folds after reserving
10% of the data for testing. The splits were performed, such that samples of the same patient were not distributed among different
data splits. In regards to data augmentation, flipping, blurring, random brightness, and elastic deformation were applied to the inputs
during training (see Appendix S-I). We chose this particular dataset from the collection of BraTSdatasets, because the chimeric-and
invertible architectures did not require further channel adjustment to make the input channels match the number of target classes.
OAI ZIB[38],[39]: The dataset consists of roughly 500 3D MRI scans of human knees. The segmentation task was to predict
five target classes, namely: background (BG), femoral bone(FB), tibial bone(TB), femoral cartilage(FC), and tibial cartilage(TC). As
6

K.Schulze,F.Peppert,C.Schütteetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104240
done for the BraTSdataset, 2D slices (384×384 pxls) were sampled from the inner 30% of each patients MRI. We chose a batch size
of eight and chose to train for a maximum of 125 epochs. As for the BraTS dataset, the data was split into five folds after reserving
10% of the data for testing. During training the inputs were augmented by horizontal flipping, blurring and brightness changes, as
mentioned above.
Tesselation dataset [40]: For the analysis of saliency maps we utilized the synthetic Tesselation dataset from the Gap-Filling
problem. We trained a ChimericU-Netfor a maximum of 150 epochs with a batch size of eight. Thousand data samples were generated,
each of size 240×240 pxls, and split into a train (80%), validation (10%) and test set (10%). In contrast to the ChimericU-Nets
trained for the OAI ZIBand BraTSdataset, no data augmentation was applied. The other hyperparameters were set as stated above
(Methods3.1).
3.3. Evaluation metrics
We employed standard computer vision metrics for medical image segmentation, such as class-wise and mean: Intersection over
Union(IoU), Recall, and Precision.
3.4. Pull-back gradient approximations
Constructing the latent space   for a dataset is computationally challenging. For this reason, we chose to approximate the
elements in   with coarse-and fine resolution approximations. In these computations our set †are the activation prior to applying
thesoftmax(inline with Remark2.1).
Coarse approximation:for y∈†and class 𝑐∈{1, … , 𝐶}, our approximation of t y,𝑐∈  is given by,
t̄ y,𝑐∶=Ψ−1(y)−Ψ−1(Δ𝑐(y)), (3.1)
where we set Δ𝑐 to be the operator that decreased the model prediction of class c by 70% (see Appendix Algorithm 3). This is a
simple first-order difference approximation, assuming Ψ−1 is differentiable everywhere, the error can be bounded above by a scalar
of the Lipschitz coefficient. We denote the set of coarse approximation of the set   by ̄ . This approximation was used to generate
the latent space embedding in the numerical experiments.
Fine approximation:We used a fourth-order numerical derivative approximation (5 point stencil) to estimate the partial derivative,
𝜕Ψ−1(y) −Ψ−1(y𝑖,𝑐+2ℎ)+8Ψ−1(y𝑖,𝑐+ℎ)
≈
𝜕y𝑖,𝑐 12ℎ
+−8Ψ−1(y𝑖,𝑐−ℎ)+Ψ−1(y𝑖,𝑐+2ℎ)
, (3.2)
12ℎ
with ℎ =0.3as the step size. Here the approximation error is of (ℎ4). We substituted the approximation of the partial derivative
into (2.11)and use the predicted class probability as the weight 𝑤 y,𝑖,𝑐. We denote the set of fine approximations of the elements of
  by ̃ .
3.5. Vectorizing and embedding the pull-back gradients
̄
Performing the analysis on the pull-back gradients, , was not numerically feasible, and furthermore, we had to remove the
spatial information, which was still encoded in them. To achieve this, we constructed a collapsing function,
𝜅∶ℝ𝑑𝑖𝑚1,𝑑𝑖𝑚2,𝑑𝑖𝑚3×ℕ→ℝ𝑑𝑖𝑚1,
(3.3)
which takes an integer as input to determine how 𝑑𝑖𝑚2and 𝑑𝑖𝑚3are collapsed. The operation of this function is more suited to be
presented as pseudo-code, hence, we present it as such in Appendix Algorithm 1. In this work, we chose the integer for collapsing to
be the number of pixels which were positively predicted in the target. That is, let t𝑦,𝑐∈̄ , we performed a pull-back of 𝑦w.r.t.class
𝑐. We define 𝑘 𝑦,𝑐 to be the number of pixels which were predicted (relative highest probability) to be class 𝑐in the target 𝑦. Then the
collapse of t𝑦,𝑐 was given by,
( )
g𝑦,𝑐∶= 𝜅(𝑡 𝑙,⌈𝑘 𝑦,𝑐∕4𝑙⌉) 𝑙=1,…,𝐿, (3.4)
where 𝑡 𝑙 is the 𝑙𝑡ℎ element of t𝑦,𝑐. We refer to g𝑦,𝑐 as the vectorized activationof t𝑦,𝑐. We chose to take the average of the top 𝑘pixels
per channel to collapse, as opposed to averaging the entire channel, to focus our attention on the most excited neurons. We found
that most activations were close to the mean excitation corresponding to the encoding of background features. This was performed
̄
for all elements of  and we chose to visualize only the vectorized activation from only the deepest layer.
We used the t-SNE implementation in Python v3.7 [41]to visualize the vectorized activations. We chose dimto be 2, perplexityto
be 150, early exaggerationto be 10, and the correlation metric. We normalised our data according to unit norm using 𝓁 norm before
2
performing the embedding. The embedding was constructed after mixing the gradient pull-backs of  𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 and  𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡.
7

K.Schulze,F.Peppert,C.Schütteetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104240
Table1
Performance on BraTS  for enhancing tumor (ET) and tumor core (TC).
Test
Method IoU(%) Recall(%) Precision(%)
(U-Nets)
ET TC ET TC ET TC
Standard 69±13 69±7 83±9 87±8 80±11 77±9
Chimeric 65±7 68±4 81±10 86±6 77±10 77±7
Invertible 64±3 63±3 85±6 88±5 73±5 69±6
(𝜇±𝜎) issuchthat [𝜇−𝜎, 𝜇+𝜎]is the 95%confidence interval.
RemainingclassesareshowninAppendixS-IVTABLES-1.
Numberoftrainableparameters:
sU-Net367k(100%),ChimericU-Net273K(74%),iU-Net247k(67%).
3.6. KNN classifier
We used a k-nearest neighbours (kNN) implementation given inscikit-learn [42]. We set 𝑘 =10and constructed a function
to map from the vectorized activations of   (as defined in (3.4)) to the IoU scores. The IoU score for an instance g y,𝑐 is constructed
by summing the IoU scores of the 𝑘nearest neighbours with the same class g ∙,𝑐and dividing by 𝑘. These calculations were performed
layer-wise, and then for the final score, the average score over all layers were taken for robustness.
3.7. Saliency maps
We used the fine gradient approximations (Methods (3.2)) to study saliency maps. In order to obtain the saliency map, the
Hadamard product of the elements from the gradient pull-backs, ̃ , and pull-backs, , were summed, as in HiResCAM[25]. The
saliency maps were then sequentially upsampled, the corresponding pseudo-code is given in Appendix Algorithm 2.
4. Results
In this section, we evaluate the qualitative and quantitative performance of the Chimeric U-Net compared to the iU-Net and the sU-
Net for the BraTS-and OAI ZIB datasets. Furthermore, we present the approximations of the gradient pull-backs of the ChimericU-Net
for the BraTS-and the Gap Filling datasets, in the context of explainability.
4.1. Combining a non-invertible encoder and an invertible decoder improves performance in comparison to the fully invertible U-Net
We evaluated the performance of the three architectures on BraTS  𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡 with five replicates and found that, the non-invertible
sU-Net performed on average better with respect to the IoU and Precision scores over all the target classes (see Table1). However, we
also found an overlap of the 95% confidence intervals of the scores between the three architectures, suggesting that the performances
were not necessarily significantly different. When we compared the Precision and Recall scores of the architectures for the classes
NET and ET, we found that the iU-Net performed the worst. The observed decrease in Precision could be attributed to the lack of
reduction of information by the iU-Net’s invertible encoder. Overall, we found that the performance scores of the ChimericU-Net
were closer to that of the sU-Netthan the iU-Net, even though the number of trainable parameters for the ChimericU-Netwere closer
to the iU-Net (≈−10%) than the sU-Net (≈+30%).
When we looked further into the shape of the individual predicted segmentations, we again found that the ChimericU-Netpre-
diction performance was between the sU-Netand the iU-Net.For example, the predictions of the sU-Netshowed smoother contours
along ED and TC (see segmentations in Fig.3(Row 2)). In contrast, the ChimericU-Netand the iU-Netpredictions showed rough
boundaries (see segmentations in Fig. 3 (Row 3 and 4)). However, the iU-Net also produced artifacts (false positive predictions)
on arbitrary positions on the image (see Fig.3(∙)) and rougher boundaries than the ChimericU-Net(see segmentations in Fig.3
(Column 4, 5 and 7)). Given the ChimericU-Netand iU-Nethave a similar decoder, we expected a closer behaviour, however, we
found having a non-invertible encoder in the ChimericU-Net,aided in reduction of the false positives rate and rough boundaries as
observed in the iU-Net.We observed that all U-Nets struggled with detecting ED for low intensity samples (see yellow seg. in Fig.3
(Column 6)). However, we found the predictions of the ChimericU-Netto be closer to the sU-Netthan the iU-Net(see yellow seg.
in Fig.3(Column 2-5)). The ChimericU-Netshowed the precisest prediction for ED, whereas the sU-Netand iU-Netover-predicted
it (see Fig.3(Column 2 and 5)), sometimes at regions where no ED was present (see yellow seg. in Fig.3(‡)), suggesting that the
ChimericU-Netis much more robust against intensity fluctuations within its input.
In summary, having a non-invertible encoder aids in performing a better segmentation task and by this the ChimericU-Netis at
least as good as the iU-Net.
As a sanity check, we also trained the three architectures on the OAI ZIB dataset. Here we observed a similar trend in perfor-
mance between the three architectures as with the BraTS dataset (see Table2). That is, the sU-Netscores on average were better than
that of the ChimericU-Netand the iU-Net.In particular, we observed that the 95%confidence intervals of the Recall and Precision
scores of the three architectures in the FC and TC classes were overlapping. Interestingly, the sU-Net had significantly better IoU
scores ([74%, 76%]) in the FC class to the ChimericU-Net([71%, 73%]), but not to the iU-Net([72%, 74%]), again showing that the
ChimericU-Netis not statistically different in the IoU distribution than theiU-Net.Looking closer at the individual predicted segmen-
8

K.Schulze,F.Peppert,C.Schütteetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104240
Fig.3.SegmentationresultsforsamplesfromBraTS2017testdatasetoverinputimages(greyscalebackground)fortheclassesedema(yellow),enhancingtumor(blue)
andnon-enhancingtumor(purple).Rowsshowthegroundtruthandthemodelssegmentationforstandard,chimericandnon-invertibleU-Nets.Thecolumnsshow
differentsamplesfurthergroupedbytheseverityofthetumor.ThemarkershighlightobservationsdiscussedintheResults4.1.
Table2
Performance on OAI ZIB  for femoral cartilage(FC) and tibial cartilage(TC).
Test
Method IoU(%) Recall(%) Precision(%)
(U-Nets)
FC TC FC TC FC TC
Standard 75±1 61±1 85±3 74±6 87±3 78±5
Chimeric 72±1 58±2 82±3 70±3 86±1 78±4
Invertible 73±1 56±3 84±1 66±5 84±1 79±3
(𝜇±𝜎) issuchthat [𝜇−𝜎, 𝜇+𝜎]is the 95%confidence interval.
RemainingclassesareshowninAppendixS-IVTABLES-2.
Numberoftrainableparameters:
sU-Net574k(100%),ChimericU-Net427K(74%),iU-Net386k(67%).
tations on the OAI ZIB test set, we observed the sU-Netto produce slightly smoother boundaries (best visible in Fig.4(Column 2)).
Besides that, the overall differences between the architectures were subtle. The iU-Netwas found to produce the best segmentations
for FC, whereas the other architectures mostly over predicted it (see pink seg. in Fig.4(⋆)). For TC, we observed it to be vice versa,
i.e. the iU-Netover predicted TC. This can be seen for the second sample of Fig.4, for which only the ChimericU-Netand sU-Net
predicted correctly the absence of TC (see green seg. in Fig.4(‡)). Furthermore the ChimericU-Netoften showed more precise pre-
dictions for TC (see green overlay in Fig.4(■)). Lastly, for the sU-Netwe noticed sometimes false predictions in bright spots of the
images (see orange seg. in Fig.4(∙)).
In summary, the ChimericU-Netis on par –at times better– with the iU-Netfor segmentation tasks over the BraTS and ZIB OAI
datasets. The non-invertible encoder is needed to increase precision, through the removal of redundant information. Combining a
non-invertible encoder with an invertible decoder, as in the ChimericU-Net,gave results closer to the purely non-invertible setting.
Nevertheless, we observed a minor performance drop of the ChimericU-Netto the sU-Net,but the trade-off for this is in the explainable
properties, which comes from the invertible decoder of the ChimericU-Net,which we demonstrate next.
4.2. The vectorized activations contain a meaningful structure w.r.t. the target classes
We used the coarse grained derivative approximation (Eq.(3.1)) to compute the pull-back gradients of the individual segmentations
(see Methods3.4-3.5) of the BraTS dataset and then used the t-SNE embedding to visualize their corresponding vectorized activations
(see Fig.5).
9

K.Schulze,F.Peppert,C.Schütteetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104240
Fig.4.SegmentationresultsforsamplesfromOAIZIBtestdatasetoverinputimages(greyscalebackground)fortheclassesfemoralbone(blue),tibialbone(orange),
femoralcartilage(pink)andtibialcartilage(green).Rowsshowthegroundtruthandthemodelssegmentationforstandard,chimericandnon-invertibleU-Nets.The
markershighlightobservationsdiscussedintheResults4.1.
In the embedding of the train dataset ( 𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛), we observed that the three target classes: NET (purple), ET (blue), and ED (yellow),
clustered distinctly from each other, with slight overlap of the two tumor types, i.e. NET and ET (see Fig.5(■)). Furthermore, we
observed in the embedding, that the ED points had a small sub-cluster closer to the other classes (see Fig. 5(⋆)), suggesting that
segmentation of ED corresponding to these points was perhaps different to the remaining ED points.
To understand the meaning of the spatial distances between the vectorized activations, we overlayed the IoU scores of the respec-
tive class prediction on the t-SNE visualisation (see Fig.6). Surprisingly, we saw that the smaller ED cluster points and the overlapping
NET and ET points showed low IoU scores (see Fig.6(⋆)). Additionally, instances of images from the mixed regions of NET and
ET were falsely predicted as the other class (see Fig.6(‡)), as expected. Lastly, we saw that there were regions within each class
cluster, where all the points in the spatial proximity had similar high scores (e.g. Fig.6(∙)). Recall, that we normalized the pull-back
gradients by the size of the class positives (see (3.4)to reduce the influence of varying sizes of predictions.
In summary, we found that the vectorized activations of the target class predictions cluster in a meaningful way, driven by the
class membership and the prediction performance.
4.3. The vectorized activations form a meaningful latent space to infer the accuracy of unseen data
We investigated if the IoU score relationship to the spatial proximity also translated to unseen data ( 𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡). For this reason, we
employed a simple kNN-classifier (see Methods3.6) to estimate the IoU score corresponding to vectorizedactivations based on the
local proximity to the vectorized activations from the training data. When overlayed onto the embedding of the vectorized activations
of the test dataset the evaluated IoU score and the kNN estimated IoU scores, we found that they were visually similar (see Fig.7a–b).
Furthermore, plotting the estimated verses the evaluated IoU scores, we observed that the estimated IoU scores were a weak upper
bound to the evaluated scores, and that the two became positively correlated for higher score values (Fig.7c).
Given the pull-backs were made for all classes predicted by the ChimericU-Net,naturally, the false positives(FPs) were also pulled
back. Hence, we observed 58 vectorized activations which had positive estimated IoU, but scored a value of zero, under this metric
(Fig.7c (x-axis)). Even though these were FPs, the kNN estimate gave only roughly 5%of the vectorized activations a score of above
10

K.Schulze,F.Peppert,C.Schütteetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104240
Fig.5.Visualization of t-SNE embedding of vectorized activations for BraTS  𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛performed by ChimericU-Net.Coloursdisplay target classes, namely ED(yellow),
ET(blue)andNET(purple).Eachpointrepresentsasinglepull-backforoneclassoftargetsample.ThemarkershighlightobservationsdiscussedintheResults4.3.
Fig.6.Visualization of t-SNE embedding of the vectorized activations for BraTS  𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛colouredby evaluated per class IoU, performed by the ChimericU-Net.The
brainscansdepictexemplarysamplesfromdifferentpositionswithintheembedding,overlayedwiththeirrespectivemodel’sprediction(P)andthegroundtruthmask
(M).ThemarkershighlightobservationsdiscussedintheResults4.3.
11

K.Schulze,F.Peppert,C.Schütteetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104240
Fig.7.Top: Visualization of t-SNE embedding of vectorized activations for BraTS  𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡performed by the ChimericU-Net.Coloursdisplay (a) the evaluated IoU scores
(b)andtheIoUscoresestimatedwiththekNN-classifier.Bottom:ComparisonofevaluatedandestimatedIoU.(c)OverallfitofkNN-classifier-estimateversusevaluated
IoU for  𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡and (d) contrast of estimates of the kNN-classifier for false positive predictions to the evaluated IoU scores for  𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛.
60%(see Fig.7d). In addition, the majority of the FPs had a low estimated score of roughly 20%. When considering the evaluated
IoU scores for  𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛, it can be seen clearly that those low scores correctly represented poor prediction performance.
In summary, the clustering of the vectorized activations of the training dataset encodes how confident the architecture is in its class
predictions. More importantly, the vectorized activations of the training data can be used to give an estimate on the true accuracy of
the prediction of unseen data.
4.4. The vectorized activations of the iU-Net differ from that of the cU-Net
Given that both the cU-Net and iU-Net employ a similar non-invertible decoder, we wanted to investigate if the iU-Net exhibited
a similar clustering pattern in the vectorized activations. We used the iU-Net decoder to conduct an analysis that was similar to that
presented in Section4.2done for the cU-Net. The vectorized activations of the target classes; Edema (ED), Enhancing Tumor (ET),
and Non-Enhancing Tumor (NET) of the iU-Net decoder clustered distinctly w.r.t.the classes (see Fig.8(top row: middle)). Unlike in
the cU-Net case, we did not observe any overlap between the clusters corresponding to ET or NET. Hence, the interactions between
the classes was not observed, meaning that each class is predicted by a distinct set of activations in the iU-Net.
Next, as done in Section4.3, we superimposed the IoU over the t-SNE embedding of the vectorized activations to see if the clusters
as well spatially encoded the IoU as observed in the cU-Net. We found that the IoU of the classes ET and ED could be delineated easily.
Furthermore, we observed that within their own clusters the points corresponding to images mapping to a high IoU prediction were
opposite to points corresponding to a low IoU prediction (see Fig.8bottom Row (middle)). However, the class of Non-Enhancing
Tumor (NET) showed no delineation between the points corresponding to high and low IoU scoring images (see Fig.8bottom Row
(⋆)), the IoU was spatially mixed. Hence, even though the decoders are the same for the iU-Net and the cU-Net, the differences in
the encoders do contribute to different latent representation structures.
The pull-backs are an inherent property of the invertible decoders, by extension, as are the class delineated embeddings of the latent
representations. For consistency, we computed the Grad-CAM based vectorized activations as described in SEG-Grad-CAM[12]. We
found that the class ED separated from NET and ET, but no separation between NET and ET was observed (see Fig.8top Row (right)).
We overlayed the IoU onto the embedding and did not observe a clear meaningful relationship between the spatial distribution of
points and their corresponding predicted IoU. We also computed the SEG-Grad-CAM based vectorized activations on the Chimeric
12

K.Schulze,F.Peppert,C.Schütteetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104240
Fig.8.Visualization of t-SNE embedding of vectorized activations for BraTS  𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛performed by sU-Net,iU-Net,and ChimericU-Net.Top: Coloursdisplay target
classes,namelyED(yellow),ET(blue)andNET(purple).Bottom:ColoursdisplayevaluatedperclassIoU.
Fig.9.Saliencymapsfordifferentpixels(indicatedbydashedcross)ofsamplefromgapdataset.Onlyforpixelsthathadtobefilledinordertofillagapreliedonly
oncontextinformation.Thecolouringshowsthepositive(red)andnegative(blue)shapingthesaliencymaps.
U-Net and found that the classes separated similarly to that of the pull-back activations, however, when we overlayed the IoU, we
did not observe any clear spatial delineation of the IoU within the clusters w.r.t.the target classes (see Appendix Fig. 7).
4.5. Pull-back gradients from the invertible decoder can be used to compute saliency maps of segmentations
Saliency maps are the state-of-the-art approach for explainability in classification tasks. We investigated if the decoder in the
ChimericU-Netcould be used to also generate saliency maps of the pixel predictions in the segmentation task. We found that both,
the BraTS and OAI ZIB, dataset sets produced trivial saliency maps, suggesting that the segmentation task was driven by texture rather
than by context (Appendix Figs. 8-13). Hence, to detect context decisions made by the ChimericU-Net, we utilized the synthetic
tessellation datasetfrom the Gap-Fillingproblem. In this task, the architecture had to segment lines in the input image, but additionally
also had to fill the gaps between incomplete lines, for which the gap pixels are indistinguishable from background pixels (Methods3.1).
The ChimericU-Net performed well on the Gap-Filling problem, as lines were correctly segmented with an IoU score of 86%.
We choose a representative source image from the test set to be segmented. On this image, we picked three points of interest: a
background pixel, a line pixel, and a gap pixel (see Fig.9a (dashed boxes)). For these pixels, we computed their respective saliency
maps, that is, highlighting the regions in the source image which aided in these pixels to be classified as a line pixel (Methods3.6).
13

K.Schulze,F.Peppert,C.Schütteetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104240
Fig.10.Saliencymapsfordifferentpixels(indicatedbydashedcross)ofasamplefromthetesselationdatasetforthesU-Net,iU-Net,andChimericU-Net.Thesaliency
mapsoftheiU-NetandChimericU-Netwereconstructedwithpull-backs,whereasforthesU-NetSEG-Grad-CAMwasutilized.Thecolouringshowsthepositive(red)
andnegative(blue)attributionsofthesaliencymaps.
Firstly, for the background pixel, we saw that the highest saliency was in proximity of the pixel itself and the signal diffused
outwards, mimicking the receptive field (see Fig. 9 b). Secondly, for the line pixel, we saw a strong saliency signal on the line
segment, and some weaker signal radiating away from the line (see Fig.9b). Lastly, for the gap pixel, we saw that the saliency was
highest at the ends of the lines at either end of the gap, with nearly no signal at the pixel, showing that the prediction is explained
by the context of the edges on either side of the gap.
We also computed the saliency maps for the outputs of the iU-Net and the sU-Net. The saliency maps of the iU-Net were computed
similar to the saliency maps of the cU-Net (see Methods(3.1)), and for the saliency maps of the sU-Net we followed the adaption of
Grad-CAM for segmentation tasks[12]. We found the explanations of the iU-Net to be comparable to that of the cU-Net (see Fig.10
Row 1 -2). However, for the case of the gap pixel, we found the iU-Net to highlight not only the edges at the end of the explained
gap segment (as seen for cU-Net), but also on line pixels in its proximity unrelated to the gap position (see Fig.10Row 2 (⋆)).
On the other hand, the saliency maps for the sU-Net computed with SEG-Grad-CAM showed strong differences to saliency maps
derived from pull-backs (see Fig.10Row 1-2 vs 3). Those explanations showed strongest highlighting on edges of the line enclosing
the gap, suggesting the architecture has a clear understanding of the two ends of the gap (see Fig.10). However, the explanations for
the single gap pixel also highlighted every other line edge enclosing a gap position unrelated to the position of the gap pixel to be
explained. Furthermore, when explaining a background pixel or a line pixel the attribution shape did not significantly change. It is
interesting to note that for the three pixels we chose, when we calculated the derivative with respect to predicting this pixel as a line
14

K.Schulze,F.Peppert,C.Schütteetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104240
(Grad-CAM saliency), the saliency highlighted all pixels that appeared to be a line. That is, changes in the intensity of any line pixel
has an impact on the individual pixel being classified as line. This is different to the pull-backs of the invertible which more locally
highlight the locals changes which would impact the pixel being classified to be class line.
In summary, the pull-back gradients from the invertible decoder can be easily used to construct saliency maps. For the context
based gap-filling problem, we observed that the cU-Net and the iU-Net pull-backs highlighted the local contextual region. In contrast,
the SEG-Grad-CAM explanations of the sU-Net highlighted a more global context.
5. Discussion
We proposed the ChimericU-Net,a novel explainable CNN architecture which combines a non-invertible encoder and an invertible
decoder to successfully solve segmentation tasks with built-in explainability. By taking this combination, we inherit the explainability
analysis from the iU-Net and the feature extraction of the sU-Net encoder.
The discussion points below are structured to match the points presented in the results, that is, we discuss the impact and limitations
of: the technical aspects of the architecture, the class disentangled latent space embedding, and lastly, the pull-back gradients based
saliency maps.
We showed that the ChimericU-Netperformed en part with the purely invertible U-Net on two biomedical image segmentation
tasks, suggesting that the non-invertible encoder has little negative impact on the performance. In contrast, the ChimericU-Netper-
formed slightly worse compared to the sU-Net,suggesting that the invertible decoder does have some negative effect on performance.
Here, we proposed a minimal architecture to demonstrate the concept of using an invertible decoder, since technical and practical
aspects of architecture analysis were not direct focus of this work. We speculate that the decrease in performance shown in this
work is primarily due to the inverse discrete wavelet transform (iDWT) that we introduced to obtain the total invertibility of the
iU-Net.Given theiDWThas no trainable parameters, this enforces the ChimericU-Netto learn the segmentation in the steps prior to
its application. We performed post hoc experiments, in which theiDWTwas exchanged with non-invertible standard convolutions,
and observed that this enhanced the segmentation quality, at the cost of the model’s explainability (results not shown). Naturally,
higher order basis functions for the iDWTcan be chosen, and also, it can be exchanged with other invertible neural functions. In
practice, this should be tailored to the dataset of interest. Given the flexibility of the encoder in the ChimericU-Net, the optimal
choice of the architecture’s encoder and its influence on the information bottleneck over the skip connections is still to be explored.
Another technical advantage we did not exploit in this work is the memory consumption savings given by the invertible components
as presented by Etmann et al. This would be a natural future direction of research to construct bigger ChimericU-Netarchitectures.
Constructing an embedding that can estimate the quality of the data for which no ground truth is available has tremendous impact
in fields like healthcare, in which large amounts of data are generated[43]. As an example, we can envisage that the embedding could
be used to tag samples which would need re-imaging due to artefacts and noise. Furthermore, in rural regions, where radiologist’s visits
are scarce, the embedding could help prioritize the images which are out of confidence of the architecture, for diagnosis. Furthermore,
with the establishment of laws such as the EU AI: Act, patients can demand local saliency and global embedding as evidence of rightful
diagnostics and practices. What is broadly referred/interpreted as the right to explainability.The use of the derivative of the pull-backs
with respect to the classes (pull-back gradients) was a fruitful idea for constructing a class-disentangled latent space embedding. We
could see that in the skip connections of the ChimericU-Netarchitecture, different classes were passed over different activations,
and over the same activations when there was a confusion in delineating the classes. This feature splitting was anticipated given
the bottleneck caused by the non-invertible decoder, and since clustering of the latent space with respect to the classes was already
previously observed in classical classification tasks. However, what came as a surprise was how the distribution of points inside the
clusters were correlated with the IoU, indicating that there is a way to estimate the performance of unseen data through the latent
space. Such observations were previously made for binary segmentation tasks[44], and now we could also observe this in a multi-class
setting. This could naturally be used to check for generalisability of the architecture. For example, if the architecture was trained on
a particular genealogical demographic and then was applied to another demographic, then we could check where the prediction of
the two groups are located in the latent space and interpret hidden biases. A line of questioning which we didn’t consider in this work
was to investigate if the pull-back gradients could detect subclasses within a poorly labelled class. For example, if we had “enhancing
tumor” and “non-enhancing tumor” labelled as a meta class “tumor”, then we would want the pull-back gradients of the class “tumor”
to be split into at least two clusters, where one cluster represented patients who had more enhancing tumor over non-enhancing, and
vice versa. Another question we only explored in part was how the correlations between the classes form over the training period. By
using a simple correlation measure, we can investigate which classes are correlated within the ChimericU-Netarchitecture. We could
further apply tools such as Testing with Concept Activation Vectors[45]with pull-back gradients to understand which classes contribute
to specific concepts. This knowledge can be used for better training or model debugging, for example, by increasing specificity of
the class labels, assessing data quality and normalization, and monitoring the training progress of the network [46],[47]. Hence,
studying the pull-back gradients and their effectiveness to explain the overall behaviour of the architecture is a natural future research
direction.
Historically, saliency maps were highlighted regions on an image where a viewer was focusing in visual experiments. This
concept was translated into modern XAI, and since has been a major tool and topic of much ongoing debate. The latter stems
from the lack of ground truth and quantitative metrics, thus making correctness and faithfulness of saliency methods con-
tentious [29], [30], [48], [31], [32], [5]. However, saliency maps are important for human interpretation, hence, we wanted to
investigate if the question (XAI 𝛽) could also produce a saliency map. To circumvent the criticism around validation of the saliency
maps, we chose to use the gap-filling problem, where a mathematical proof was already given on where the saliency of a classification
15

K.Schulze,F.Peppert,C.Schütteetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104240
of a line segment should lay in the source image. We could visually verify that the saliency maps made from (XAI 𝛽) did highlight the
expected regions in the input image, suggesting that (XAI 𝛽) could also construct meaningful contextual saliency maps. The saliency
maps in this work were constructed for only the positive class predictions, however, a future direction would also be to consider the
pull-back gradients of the false negative predictions and investigate their saliency maps. Lastly, recalling from the introduction, we do
not give a comparison between (XAI 𝛼) and (XAI 𝛽) in this work. Despite the proliferation of many XAI methods over the past years,
only a few focus on their evaluation. This is rooted to the absence of ground truths, making the comparison of (XAI 𝛼) and (XAI 𝛽)
challenging. But with the emergence of metrics and ground truth for saliency maps, a clear future direction would be to investigate
and categorize the various saliency maps arising from XAI questions.
In conclusion, the ChimericU-Netarises from the principle of enforcing explainability into the architecture, rather than studying
explainability of a general architecture. Through the invertibility of the decoder we could inherently produce both global-and local
explainability through class embeddings and saliency maps, respectively. The motivation for this work was to bring explainability to
the segmentation task as this is under studied in the field of XAI. However, if other DL-based tasks have a similar encoder-decoder
compartmental structure, applying the Chimeric principle, that is, making the decoder invertible, would make the pull-back gradients
automatically accessible. For example, the classification linear layers of VGG/Inception could be replaced by Normalizing flows[49],
we could compute the pull-back directly to encodings. However, in practice, invertibility is a strong requirement for general DL-based
tasks. We believe that the ChimericU-Netarchitecture is a step in the right direction towards growing confidence, reliability, and
trust in Deep Learning approaches in healthcare.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Kenrick Schulze:Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Validation, Methodology.Felix Peppert:Writing – review
& editing, Software, Methodology. Christof Schütte: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Funding
acquisition, Conceptualization.Vikram Sunkara:Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Validation, Supervision, Project
administration, Methodology, Investigation, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
AppendixA. Supplementary material
Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .artint .2024 .104240.
Data availability
The authors do not have permission to share data.
References
[1]S.AsgariTaghanaki,K.Abhishek,J.P.Cohen,J.Cohen-Adad,G.Hamarneh,Deepsemanticsegmentationofnaturalandmedicalimages:areview,Artif.Intell.
Rev.54(1)(2021)137–178.
[2]S.Mehralivand,D.Yang,S.A.Harmon,D.Xu,Z.Xu,H.Roth,S.Masoudi,D.Kesani,N.Lay,M.J.Merino,etal.,Deeplearning-basedartificialintelligencefor
prostatecancerdetectionatbiparametricmri,Abdom.Radiol.47(4)(2022)1425–1434.
[3]P.K.Mallick,S.H.Ryu,S.K.Satapathy,S.Mishra,G.N.Nguyen,P.Tiwari,Brainmriimageclassificationforcancerdetectionusingdeepwaveletautoencoder-based
deepneuralnetwork,IEEEAccess7(2019)46278–46287.
[4]Y.LeCun,Y.Bengio,G.Hinton,Deeplearning,Nature521(7553)(2015)436–444.
[5]W.Samek,G.Montavon,S.Lapuschkin,C.J.Anders,K.-R.Müller,Explainingdeepneuralnetworksandbeyond:areviewofmethodsandapplications,Proc.
IEEE109(3)(2021)247–278.
[6]B.Goodman,S.Flaxman,EuropeanUnionregulationsonalgorithmicdecision-makinganda“righttoexplanation”,AIMag.38(3)(2017)50–57.
[7]O.Ronneberger,P.Fischer,T.Brox,U-net:convolutionalnetworksforbiomedicalimagesegmentation,in:InternationalConferenceonMedicalImageComputing
andComputer-AssistedIntervention,Springer,2015,pp.234–241.
[8]S.Ghosh,A.Pal,S.Jaiswal,K.Santosh,N.Das,M.Nasipuri,Segfast-v2:semanticimagesegmentationwithlessparametersindeeplearningforautonomous
driving,Int.J.Mach.Learn.Cybern.10(11)(2019)3145–3154.
[9]J.Haspiel,N.Du,J.Meyerson,L.P.RobertJr,D.Tilbury,X.J.Yang,A.K.Pradhan,Explanationsandexpectations:trustbuildinginautomatedvehicles,in:
Companionofthe2018ACM/IEEEInternationalConferenceonHuman-RobotInteraction,2018,pp.119–120.
[10] N.Siddique,S.Paheding,C.P.Elkin,V.Devabhaktuni,U-netanditsvariantsformedicalimagesegmentation:areviewoftheoryandapplications,IEEEAccess
(2021).
[11] G.Du,X.Cao,J.Liang,X.Chen,Y.Zhan,Medicalimagesegmentationbasedonu-net:areview,J.ImagingSci.Technol.64(2)(2020)20508.
[12] K.Vinogradova,A.Dibrov,E.W.Myers,Towardsinterpretablesemanticsegmentationviagradient-weightedclassactivationmapping,in:Proceedingsofthe
AAAIConferenceonArtificialIntelligence,2020,pp.13943–13944.
[13] L.Hoyer,M.Munoz,P.Katiyar,A.Khoreva,V.Fischer,Gridsaliencyforcontextexplanationsofsemanticsegmentation,Adv.NeuralInf.Process.Syst.32(2019).
[14] T.Koker,F.Mireshghallah,T.Titcombe,G.Kaissis,U-noise:learnablenoisemasksforinterpretableimagesegmentation,in:2021IEEEInternationalConference
onImageProcessing(ICIP),IEEE,2021,pp.394–398.
[15] R.R.Selvaraju,M.Cogswell,A.Das,R.Vedantam,D.Parikh,D.Batra,Grad-cam:visualexplanationsfromdeepnetworksviagradient-basedlocalization,in:
ProceedingsoftheIEEEInternationalConferenceonComputerVision,2017,pp.618–626.
16

K.Schulze,F.Peppert,C.Schütteetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104240
[16] A.Inglis,A.Parnell,C.B.Hurley,Visualizingvariableimportanceandvariableinteractioneffectsinmachinelearningmodels,J.Comput.Graph.Stat.31(3)
(2022)766–778.
[17] S.M.Lundberg,S.-I.Lee,Aunifiedapproachtointerpretingmodelpredictions,Adv.NeuralInf.Process.Syst.30(2017).
[18] M.T.Ribeiro,S.Singh,C.Guestrin,“whyshouldItrustyou?”explainingthepredictionsofanyclassifier,in:Proceedingsofthe22ndACMSIGKDDInternational
ConferenceonKnowledgeDiscoveryandDataMining,2016,pp.1135–1144.
[19] K.Simonyan,A.Vedaldi,A.Zisserman,Deepinsideconvolutionalnetworks:visualisingimageclassificationmodelsandsaliencymaps,arXivpreprintarXiv:
1312.6034,2013.
[20] D.Smilkov,N.Thorat,B.Kim,F.Viégas,M.Wattenberg,Smoothgrad:removingnoisebyaddingnoise,arXivpreprint,arXiv:1706.03825,2017.
[21] S.Bach,A.Binder,G.Montavon,F.Klauschen,K.-R.Müller,W.Samek,Onpixel-wiseexplanationsfornon-linearclassifierdecisionsbylayer-wiserelevance
propagation,PLoSONE10(7)(2015)e0130140,https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0130140.
[22] D.Rezende,S.Mohamed,Variationalinferencewithnormalizingflows,in:InternationalConferenceonMachineLearning,PMLR,2015,pp.1530–1538.
[23] C.Etmann,R.Ke,C.-B.Schönlieb,iunets:fullyinvertibleu-netswithlearnableup-anddownsampling,arXivpreprintarXiv:2005.05220,2020.
[24] G.Arvanitidis,S.Hauberg,B.Schölkopf,Geometricallyenrichedlatentspaces,arXivpreprintarXiv:2008.00565,2020.
[25] R.L.Draelos,L.Carin,Hirescam:faithfullocationrepresentationinvisualattentionforexplainable3dmedicalimageclassification,arXivpreprintarXiv:2011.
08891,2020.
[26] A.Chattopadhay,A.Sarkar,P.Howlader,V.N.Balasubramanian,Grad-cam++:generalizedgradient-basedvisualexplanationsfordeepconvolutionalnetworks,
in:2018IEEEWinterConferenceonApplicationsofComputerVision(WACV),IEEE,2018,pp.839–847.
[27] P.-J.Kindermans,K.T.Schütt,M.Alber,K.-R.Müller,D.Erhan,B.Kim,S.Dähne,Learninghowtoexplainneuralnetworks:patternnetandpatternattribution,
arXivpreprintarXiv:1705.05598,2017.
[28] A.Chattopadhay,A.Sarkar,P.Howlader,V.N.Balasubramanian,Grad-Cam++:GeneralizedGradient-BasedVisualExplanationsforDeepConvolutionalNet-
works,2018IEEEWinterConferenceonApplicationsofComputerVision(WACV),Mar2018.
[29] L.Sixt,M.Granz,T.Landgraf,WhenexplanationsLie:whymanymodifiedbpattributionsfail,in:InternationalConferenceonMachineLearning,PMLR,2020,
pp.9046–9057.
[30] A.Ghorbani,A.Abid,J.Zou,Interpretationofneuralnetworksisfragile,Proc.AAAIConf.Artif.Intell.33(2019)3681–3688.
[31] R.Tomsett,D.Harborne,S.Chakraborty,P.Gurram,A.Preece,Sanitychecksforsaliencymetrics,Proc.AAAIConf.Artif.Intell.34(2020)6021–6029.
[32] P.-J.Kindermans,S.Hooker,J.Adebayo,M.Alber,K.T.Schütt,S.Dähne,D.Erhan,B.Kim,The(un)reliabilityofsaliencymethods,in:ExplainableAI:Interpreting,
ExplainingandVisualizingDeepLearning,Springer,2019,pp.267–280.
[33] Y.Wu,K.He,Groupnormalization,in:ProceedingsoftheEuropeanConferenceonComputerVision(ECCV),2018,pp.3–19.
[34] A.Paszke,S.Gross,F.Massa,A.Lerer,J.Bradbury,G.Chanan,T.Killeen,Z.Lin,N.Gimelshein,L.Antiga,A.Desmaison,A.Kopf,E.Yang,Z.DeVito,M.
Raison,A.Tejani,S.Chilamkurthy,B.Steiner,L.Fang,J.Bai,S.Chintala,Pytorch:animperativestyle,high-performancedeeplearninglibrary,in:H.Wallach,
H.Larochelle,A.Beygelzimer,F.d’Alché-Buc,E.Fox,R.Garnett(Eds.),AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems,vol.32,CurranAssociates,Inc.,
2019,pp.8024–8035,http://papers.neurips.cc/paper/9015-pytorch-an-imperative-style-high-performance-deep-learning-library.pdf.
[35] B.H.Menze,A.Jakab,S.Bauer,J.Kalpathy-Cramer,K.Farahani,J.Kirby,Y.Burren,N.Porz,J.Slotboom,R.Wiest,etal.,Themultimodalbraintumorimage
segmentationbenchmark(brats),IEEETrans.Med.Imaging34(10)(2014)1993–2024.
[36] S.Bakas,H.Akbari,A.Sotiras,M.Bilello,M.Rozycki,J.S.Kirby,J.B.Freymann,K.Farahani,C.Davatzikos,Advancingthecancergenomeatlasgliomamri
collectionswithexpertsegmentationlabelsandradiomicfeatures,Sci.Data4(1)(2017)1–13.
[37] S.Bakas,M.Reyes,A.Jakab,S.Bauer,M.Rempfler,A.Crimi,R.T.Shinohara,C.Berger,S.M.Ha,M.Rozycki,etal.,Identifyingthebestmachinelearning
algorithmsforbraintumorsegmentation,progressionassessment,andoverallsurvivalpredictioninthebratschallenge,arXivpreprintarXiv:1811.02629,2018.
[38] F.Ambellan,A.Tack,M.Ehlke,S.Zachow,Automatedsegmentationofkneeboneandcartilagecombiningstatisticalshapeknowledgeandconvolutionalneural
networks:datafromtheosteoarthritisinitiative,Med.ImageAnal.52(2)(2019)109–118,https://doi.org/10.1016/j.media.2018.11.009.
[39] Theosteoarthritisinitiativedatabase,https://nda.nih.gov/oai/.(Accessed29March2022).
[40] F.Peppert,M.vonKleist,C.Schütte,V.Sunkara,Onthesufficientconditionforsolvingthegap-fillingproblemusingdeepconvolutionalneuralnetworks,IEEE
Trans.NeuralNetw.Learn.Syst.(2021).
[41] M.Lutz,ProgrammingPython,O’ReillyMedia,Inc.,2001.
[42] F.Pedregosa,G.Varoquaux,A.Gramfort,V.Michel,B.Thirion,O.Grisel,M.Blondel,P.Prettenhofer,R.Weiss,V.Dubourg,J.Vanderplas,A.Passos,D.
Cournapeau,M.Brucher,M.Perrot,E.Duchesnay,Scikit-learn:machinelearninginpython,J.Mach.Learn.Res.12(2011)2825–2830.
[43] S.Dash,S.K.Shakyawar,M.Sharma,S.Kaushik,Bigdatainhealthcare:management,analysisandfutureprospects,J.BigData6(1)(2019)1–25.
[44] A.Janik,K.Sankaran,A.Ortiz,Interpretingblack-boxsemanticsegmentationmodelsinremotesensingapplications,in:D.Archambault,I.Nabney,J.Peltonen
(Eds.),MachineLearningMethodsinVisualisationforBigData,TheEurographicsAssociation,2019.
[45] B.Kim,M.Wattenberg,J.Gilmer,C.Cai,J.Wexler,F.Viegas,etal.,Interpretabilitybeyondfeatureattribution:quantitativetestingwithconceptactivation
vectors(tcav),in:InternationalConferenceonMachineLearning,PMLR,2018,pp.2668–2677.
[46] J.Schneider,M.Vlachos,Reflective-net:learningfromexplanations,arXivpreprintarXiv:2011.13986,2020.
[47] J.Adebayo,M.Muelly,I.Liccardi,B.Kim,Debuggingtestsformodelexplanations,arXivpreprintarXiv:2011.05429,2020.
[48] J.Adebayo,J.Gilmer,M.Muelly,I.Goodfellow,M.Hardt,B.Kim,Sanitychecksforsaliencymaps,Adv.NeuralInf.Process.Syst.31(2018).
[49] J.P.Agnelli,M.Cadeiras,E.G.Tabak,C.V.Turner,E.Vanden-Eijnden,Clusteringandclassificationthroughnormalizingflowsinfeaturespace,MultiscaleModel.
Simul.8(5)(2010)1784–1802.
17

