ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
ContentslistsavailableatScienceDirect
Artificial Intelligence
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/artint
Interpretation modeling: Social grounding of sentences by
reasoning over their implicit moral judgments
Liesbeth Allein∗, Maria Mihaela Truşcaˇ, Marie-Francine Moens
DepartmentofComputerScience,KULeuven,Celestijnenlaan200A,Heverlee,3001,Belgium
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Dataset link: https:// The social and implicit nature of human communication ramifies readers’ understandings of
github .com /laallein /origamIM written sentences. Single gold-standard interpretations rarely exist, challenging conventional
assumptions in natural language processing. This work introduces the interpretation modeling
Keywords:
(IM) task which involves modeling several interpretations of a sentence’s underlying semantics
Interpretationmodeling
Implicit language to unearth layers of implicit meaning. To obtain these, IM is guided by multiple annotations of
Social grounding social relation and common ground -in this work approximated by reader attitudes towards the
Moral reasoning author and their understanding of moral judgments subtly embedded in the sentence. We propose
Natural language generation a number of modeling strategies that rely on one-to-one and one-to-many generation methods
Content moderation that take inspiration from the philosophical study of interpretation. A first-of-its-kind IM dataset
is curated to support experiments and analyses. The modeling results, coupled with scrutiny of
the dataset, underline the challenges of IM as conflicting and complex interpretations are socially
plausible. This interplay of diverse readings is affirmed by automated and human evaluations
on the generated interpretations. Finally, toxicity analyses in the generated interpretations
demonstrate the importance of IM for refining filters of content and assisting content moderators
in safeguarding the safety in online discourse.1
1. Introduction
“Interpretation (...) is the work of thought which consists in deciphering the hidden meaning in the apparent meaning, in unfolding the
levels of meaning implied in the literal meaning. (...) There is interpretation wherever there is multiple meaning, and it is in interpretation
that the plurality of meaning is made manifest.”2
When simulating human understanding of sentences in natural language, artificial intelligence systems need to look beyond the
surface and reason about the communication that is happening between the lines, acknowledging that one unambiguous interpretation
of a sentence’s meaning in natural language rarely exists. Among the root causes of diverse interpretations are properties of the
sentence itself, such as lexical, structural, and pragmatic ambiguities [46]. However, diversity is notably amplified by the unique
perspectives of individual readers. Going beyond the conventional exploration of surface-level and contextual ambiguities in natural
* Correspondingauthor.
E-mailaddress:liesbeth.allein@kuleuven.be(L.Allein).
1 The dataset is publicly available: https://github .com /laallein /origamIM.
2 Ricoeur [70], Existence and Hermeneutics, p 13.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2024.104234
Received 17 November 2023; Received in revised form 23 September 2024; Accepted 10 October 2024
Availableonline28October2024
0004-3702/© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Fig.1.Example taken from the origamIMdataset. A sentence ( ) is translated into various reader interpretations ( ), in this illustration three interpreta-
tions.Itdoessobyreasoningoverthereactionsofmultiplereaders,inthisillustrationthreereaders,sparkeduponreadingthesentence:thereaders’attitudestowards
theauthorexplicitlyannotatedbythereadersthemselves( )andthehiddenmoraljudgmentsaboutpeoplefeaturedinthesentencethatthereadersinferred
( ).Thesereactionsrepresentthesocialgroundingofthesentence.
language understanding, this work examines ambiguities at the hidden level of a sentenceand models multiple sentence interpretations
by grounding sentences in society using various reader understandings of their implicit meanings.
We propose the interpretation modeling (IM) task which involves modeling multiple understandings of a text, especially of
its implied content, that reflect how it may be read in society. IM is not synonymous with diverse paraphrase generation. While
paraphrases are expected to convey the same surface-level meaning of the original text [91], interpretations go beyond mere lexical
and structural rephrases, laying bare its implicit communication.
IM posits that single ground-truth evaluations and interpretations ignore the complex social reality of natural language under-
standing. Disagreement in the ground truth is inherent to human understanding [60,56,76]. Yet, most works in natural language
processing (NLP) still heavily count on single gold standards when processing language. This is shown by a majority of state-of-the-
art methods for natural language understanding that rely on large language models fine-tuned on single interpretations or sets of
equivalent interpretations (e.g., paraphrases). Relying on single ground truths in IM would suffer from three main shortcomings that
hinder the implicit and social complexities of language comprehension: (i) Right-or-wrong assumption: A single interpretation strongly
contradicts the ambiguous nature of human communication and distills IM to be a matter of right or wrong. (ii) Unilaterial understand-
ing: The interpretations from single reader groups that guide model optimization leave the model oblivious of alternative readings in
society. (iii) Partial coverage: Since multiple meanings can underlie an explicit sentence, it is rather unlikely that single ground-truth
interpretations capture all of them – especially in cases where ambiguity is intentionally crafted, as observed in dogwhistles [29,51].
This work seeks to ground language understanding in society (= social grounding) by accommodating the intricacies of diverse human
interpretations, opening new opportunities for developing more nuanced and socially intelligent language models. To support the
proposed IM task, we construct a new dataset called origamIM,3in which multiple annotators infer social evaluations hidden in
a sentence and describe their interpretation of that sentence (Fig.1). The annotated evaluations then guide interpretation modeling.
While diverse dimensions of underlying meaning contribute to the semantics of a sentence and guide interpretation (e.g., social
values/norms, expressed/triggered emotions, and communicative goals), this work zooms in on implicit judgments of human morality.
Moral judgments present a challenging case since people inherently recognize and assess moral behavior differently despite sharing
a common understanding of moral norms. The annotations confirm this assumption as readers not only disagree on the type of
3 Origami is the Japanese art of paper folding where a single piece of paper can be transformed to various complex sculptures following different folding steps.
Analogously,asentencemaybedifferentlyinterpreteddependingonareader’sunderstandingofitshiddencontent.
2

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
behavior that is implicitly communicated (e.g., confidentand ambitious) but also differentiate between levels of appropriateness of the
same behavior differently (e.g., over-ambitiousand properly ambitious), showing how readers assess morality in their own way. The
annotated moral judgments are grounded in Virtue Ethics [7], a philosophical framework for describing moral behavior. It establishes
a workable framework for computational models to distinguish patterns of similar (un)desirable behaviors across various contexts
and ground sentences in society.
We propose a set of IM models, parameterized by pre-trained language models, that approach IM as a one-to-one or one-to-many
generation task. Whereas a sentence is socially grounded by one reader at a time and one interpretation is produced in the one-to-one
setting, the one-to-many setting adopts diverse grounding by using annotations on attitude and moral judgments from multiple readers.
That way, the model can simultaneously reason over several socially grounded instances for generating multiple interpretations.
Social grounding is here established by conditioning the generation on the attitudes and moral judgments together with the input
sentence. We also design control mechanisms based on the properties of interpretation described in philosophical studies for guiding
the machine learning models to generate interpretations that are semantically diverse. More specifically, we design appropriate loss
functions that guide the generation of diverse interpretations. Note that we do not determine a single correct interpretation among the
set of ground-truth interpretations annotated for a given sentence and that the interpretations used during training are not exhaustive.
While interpretations can be anticipated or intended by the author, unexpected and competing interpretations are not considered
lower in value. The diversity and validity of the generated interpretations are demonstrated through rigorous automatic and human
evaluations.
Lastly, we investigate whether interpretations of the origamIM sentences made by humans and interpretations generated
by our models help recovering toxic content. Using a standard tool that analyses the level of toxicity, insult, and identity attack
expressed in a sentence, we show that both human and automatically generated interpretations reveal underlying toxicity which is
not recognized and flagged when only considering the original sentence. Our interpretation generation models seem to capture the
different views that people have about real-world problems. Therefore, the research of this paper naturally has applications in several
NLP-related tasks, such as content moderation, hate speech analysis, and fake news detection [21,3].
Contributions The main contributions of this article can be summarized as follows:
• We introduce a challenging NLU taskcalled interpretation modeling which involves generating reader interpretations of sentences,
centering on deriving their underlying semantics and unearthing layers of implicit meaning, in this work conditioned on implied
moral judgments and reader attitudes towards the author.
• We curate a supporting dataset, origamIM, containing sentences featuring people entities where each sentence is annotated
multiple times with sentence interpretations and inferences of implicit moral judgments.
• We demonstrate that it is technically feasible to generate diverse interpretations through social grounding. For this, we develop
a set of generation frameworksapproaching interpretation modeling as a one-to-one or one-to-many language generation task and
propose control mechanisms for enforcing diversity in the generated interpretations.
• We showcase the importance of interpretation modelingin content moderation and toxicity detection, which may lead to healthier
and safer online environments.
In the remainder of the article, we first discuss the creation of the origamIM dataset supporting IM (§ 2) and provide
rigorous dataset analyses (§3). Next, we present a number of frameworks in which IM is approached as a one-to-one and one-to-
many generation task (§4). The experiments (§5and §6) indicate that the proposed methods are able to diversify interpretations
through social grounding. This is also confirmed by human evaluations of the generated interpretations (§7). Those evaluations also
show that the interpretations are not merely rewrites but present nuanced meanings. We demonstrate that IM plays a pivotal role in
building more accurate filters of content (§8). We continue to situate our research in the existing body of work (§9). Finally, the
conclusion (§10) discusses the limitations and presents how future work can build further on our work.
2. OrigamIM: construction
We describe how we construct a dataset of English sentences (§ 2.1) that mention people (§ 2.2.1), where each sentence is
annotated with multiple interpretations and grounded moral judgments (§2.2.2).4
2.1. Data source
We automatically crawl blog posts in English from the Subreddit /r/ChangeMyView, dating between 13 July 2020 and 3 March
2022. The subreddit has been proven to be a valuable resource for analyzing and modeling discourse [54,1,52]. In this moderated
Reddit community, people present their world views, often discussing controversial and polarizing topics, such as abortion and
racism, and invite others to present counterarguments. It presents suitable data for IM as it hosts a diverse and large user base (top
1% subreddit ranked by size at the moment of dataset collection), contains a moderated wealth of posts discussing popular and
emerging topics, and allows users to anonymously express their genuine opinions and respond to those of others. After removing
4 The dataset has been presented in a short workshop paper [5].
3

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Fig.2.Annotationprocedureintworounds.Inthefirstround,annotatorsmarkthepeopleentitiesandindicatewhetheratleastonecharactertraitisimplied.Inthe
secondround,annotatorsindicatetheirattitudetowardstheauthoruponreadingthesentence,writetheirinterpretationofthesentence,anddescribetheimplied
traitsforeachpeopleentity.
duplicated and deleted posts, we extract for each post the title, body text, and additional metadata. We do not retrieve the comments
that were made in response to the post. Since we are interested in sentence interpretation, we split the body text into sentences using
SpaCy.
2.2. Annotation procedure
Annotation is performed in two rounds on Amazon Mechanical Turk5between April 2022 and August 20226(Fig.2). The complete
annotation guidelines containing screenshots of the annotation platform, detailed descriptions of the annotation instructions, defini-
tions of all annotation labels, and a copy of the two qualification tests are enclosed in the Appendix (A.1, A.2, and A.3). Annotators
can only annotate a sentence once in each annotation round and freely skip sentences. The annotators are selected based on their
proven annotation quality on the MTurk platform and their performance on the qualification tests. We do not select based on specific
demographic features as the number of annotators for a sentence is too limited for gathering a wide array of interpretations reflecting
the views held in specific demographic groups. Taking into account demographics here may risk regarding single interpretations as
representative of a demographic group.
2.2.1. Round 1: entities and presence of character traits
Crowd workers are instructed to mark all unique entities in each sentence referring to people other than the author, if any, and to
indicate whether the author implies a character trait about at least one of the entities. A character trait describes a voluntary aspect of
a person’s behavior or attitude, e.g. greedyand loyal. Note that the annotators are not required to specify which entity is being judged
or to describe the trait at this point. The title of the post from which the sentence is taken is provided as additional context. Note that
5 https://www .mturk .com/.
6 Since annotation was performed before popular text generation models became publicly and freely accessible, e.g. ChatGPT (30 November 2022) and Bard (21
March2023),weassumethatthesentencesweremanuallyannotated[77].
4

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Table1
OverviewoftheSpheresofActions(SoA)withtheirvirtueandvices[7].
Context Appropriateness
SphereofAction(SoA) ViceofDeficiency VirtueofMean ViceofExcess
Confidence,fear,uncertainty Cowardice Courage Rashness
Pleasuresofthebody Insensibility Temperance Profligacy
Giving&taking:Smallmoney Stinginess Liberality Prodigality
Giving&taking:Addedvalue Meanness Magnificence Vulgarity
Pride,honourascause Little-mindedness High-mindedness Vanity
Ambition,honourasgoal Lackofambition Properambition Over-ambition
Anger Spiritlessness Gentleness Wrathfulness
Pleasureandpainofothers Cross,contentious Agreeableness Flattery
Truth,honestyaboutoneself Irony Truthfulness Boastfulness
Amusingconversation Boorishness Wittiness Buffoonery
the title presents low-information context and richer context such as the full post may steer interpretation differently. However, we
opt for this specific annotation setup as it, on the one hand, reduces the cognitive load during annotation and, on the other, simulates
a situation where sentences are taken out of context. In online environments, isolated sentences can easily go viral and spark intense
discussions.
Each sentence is independently annotated by two annotators. In cases where they disagree on the presence/absence of implied
traits, a third annotator is consulted and a majority vote is taken. We ensure data quality and annotation consistency by requesting
the workers to pass a qualification test before admitting them to the annotation task. The test first describes the main annotation
rules for marking people entities (see AppendixA.2) and then tests their knowledge of the rules by having them select the correct
annotations for multiple sentences. During annotation, the main rules are displayed below the sentence, and detailed rules with
illustrative sentences are given in a designated instructions tab. We manually check the text spans corresponding to the entities to
ensure annotation consistency. A total of 6,820 sentences from 396 posts are annotated by 113 unique crowd workers, of which 2,018
implied a character trait of at least one people entity. The high portion of sentences implying judgments showcases people’s tendency
to talk about other people and their morality in this Subreddit.
2.2.2. Round 2: interpretations and judgments
The sentences with at least one implied moral judgment in Round 1 are sent to Round 2. Each sentence is annotated by at least
five different crowd workers (231 unique workers in total). The title of the post is again presented as supporting context.
Attitude as social relation The crowd workers first rate their attitude towards the author on a five-point Likert scale ranging from very
negative(1) to very positive(5); {very negative, negative, neutral, positive, very positive}. They do this by setting a slider to the best-fitting
attitude. The attitudes reflect reader impressions of the author upon reading the sentence. The workers can consult an overview of
the different attitudes and their definitions in a designated instructions tab during annotation.
Sentence interpretation The workers rewrite the given sentence in their own words so that it reflects their interpretation of the
sentence and its hidden messages. They are explicitly instructed to not copy the original sentence.
Moral judgments as implicit social evaluations For each unique people entity identified in the first annotation round, the workers now
indicate whether or not the author implies a character trait. If so, they describe the implied trait – preferably using an adjective
(free text) – ground the trait in society by labeling the trait’s social evaluation as good or bad(select from a list), and classify it in
a well-established moral framework called Virtue Ethics [7]. Note that the inferred, annotated moral judgments do not necessarily
align with those held by the annotators themselves nor those intended by the author.
The moral theory introduced by Aristotle poses that a person’s moral character can be evaluated by their voluntary behavior. Those
behaviors occur in ten types of context or Spheres of Action(SoA). After a behavior is assigned to its best-fitting SoA, it can be situated
on an axis of contextual appropriateness ranging from vice of deficiencyto virtue of meanand vice of excess. For instance, vanityis a vice
of excessregarding honour as a cause and pride. A character trait is thus judged by its social desirability (i.e., good/virtue and bad/vice)
within a context (i.e., deficient, mean, or excessive). In contrast to Moral Foundation Theory (MFT) [27], a popular framework for
operationalizing moral reasoning [45,32,6], Virtue Ethics does not regard a negative behavior as merely negative but further defines
it as a deficient or excessive behavior based on its contextual appropriateness. Table 1presents the Virtue Ethics framework. The
main advantage of grounding in Virtue Ethics is that it allows readers from different cultural and social backgrounds to annotate their
interpretation of the implied moral judgments by their own standards. Since the concept of contextual appropriateness is culturally
defined, some societies may find the character of a person virtuous while others may find it vicious.
Prior to starting the second annotation round, the annotators have to pass an instruction test which explains the different aspects
of Virtue Ethics. The test first explains the three contextual appropriateness labels (i.e., vice of deficiency, virtue of mean, vice of
excess) and then goes over all SoAs. For each SoA, a clear example sentence and a person of interest is given. The workers then
have to select the appropriateness label that best describes that person’s behavior. Annotators can consult a simplified theory with
illustrative sentences at any time during annotation.
5

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Table2
Statistics of the origamIMdataset.
DatasetStatistics
#Sentences 2,018
—Totalwordcount 44,902
#Peopleentities(E) 3,313
—#Sentenceswith1/2/3/4+E 1,103/661/174/80
#Interpretations 9,851
—Totalwordcount 155,368
Distributionattitudes
–Verynegative 813(8.25%)
–Negative 1,971(20%)
–Neutral 4,302(43.67%)
–Positive 2,025(20.56%)
–Verypositive 740(7.51%)
To control data quality and annotator fatigue, we manually check the annotated interpretations and remove annotations that
contain interpretations that are unrelated to the sentence (i.e., interpretation and sentence do not share any information), poorly-
formulated interpretations (i.e., unfinished sentences and sentences that contain many typos), interpretations that present a brief
evaluation instead of an understanding of the sentence (e.g., “It’s correct.”), or interpretations that are an exact copy of the sentence
or supporting title. We also automatically reject annotation submissions where the annotator failed to answer whether or not a
character trait is implied for each people entity in the sentence.
3. OrigamIM: analysis
General dataset statistics are provided in Table2. Analyses and findings are illustrated with examples from the dataset.
3.1. Diversity in interpretation
IM differs from paraphrasing as it does not consistently maintain the explicit semantics of a source sentence. Interpretations
are thus expected to semantically diverge from the source sentence. We measure the lexical and semantic diversity between each
sentence-interpretation pair in the dataset. The pairs showcase strong lexical diversity, with BLEU-1 [58]: 𝜇=10.09. BERTScore [88]
indicates high semantic similarity: 𝜇=.96 (F1 score). However, note that the high semantic similarity score can be attributed to
BERTScore’s failure to capture subtle nuances between semantically-related lexical words [28]. Natural language inference (NLI)7
presents another view on semantic diversity and relates it to entailment relations between source and target [73]. The NLI results
suggest that about a third of sentence-interpretation pairs present a neutral or even contradiction relation. An example of the latter
is the following:
Sentence: Many people in the comments believe that this discrepancy is caused by women being much pickier than men on
appearance.
Interpretation: The writer describes their belief that women are not pickier about partners than men are.
It seems from the interpretation that the reader believes that the author of the example sentence disagrees with the people in the
comments and therefore thinks the opposite of what is explicitly stated. When taking [title + sentence]-interpretation pairs, the
share of entailment relations increases, suggesting that many readers actively leverage the title when making sense of a sentence.
Note that NLI analyses where reported speech phrases, as in the example interpretation given above, are automatically removed from
the interpretations yield similar results. This confirms the validity of the NLI experiments while showing that the reported speech
phrases seem to have little impact on the prediction of entailment relations.
The semantic diversity is also demonstrated by the Pearson correlation between the toxicity, insult, and identity attack scores,
observed in the input sentences and their interpretations. The scores are computed through the well-established Perspective API.8
This API is applied by major news outlets and social media, such as The New York Times and Reddit, to moderate the discussions
held on their online platforms. The scores range from 0 to 1 and represent the proportion of people who would perceive an utterance
as toxic, insulting, or attacking. For example, a toxicity score of 0.81 indicates that 81% of the people would find the utterance toxic.
The moderate correlation scores (0.58 for toxicity, 0.66 for insult, and 0.69 for identity attack) indicate that the annotators did not
simply copy or paraphrase the input sentence but instead provided their own insights and interpretations.
7 https://huggingface .co /ynie /roberta -large -snli _mnli _fever _anli _R1 _R2 _R3 -nli[55].
8 https://perspectiveapi .com/. The API hosts single-language CNN classifiers that have been distilled from a multilingual BERT-based model pretrained on data
fromonlineforums.TheAPIisanopen-sourceproductdevelopedbyJigsawincollaborationwithGoogle’sCounterAbuseTechnologyteam([37]).
6

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Table3
Twosamplesfromthedatasetthatillustratethedisagreementexistingbetweenreadersintermsofmoraljudgments(top)andattitude(bottom).
[Title]CMV:IfIwanttokillmyself,noonehastherighttoforcemefromdoingso/preventmeagainstmywill.
[Sentence]Fortheexactsamereasonthatawomanhastherighttohaveanabortion,she(oranyone)hastherighttoendherownlife
becauseitisherright.
[Interpretation] [Attitude] [MoralJudgments]
Womanhastherighttodecideeverythingabouttheirownbody neutral awoman: good,honest,VE:truth,honestyaboutoneself-
andlifeaspects. VirtueofMean
Thewriterisarguingthatonehasarighttosuicidemuchasone negative awoman:/
hasarighttoabortion,beinganissueofbodilyautonomy.
Pro-choicemeansthatwomenhavethechoicetodowhatever verynegative awoman: bad,irrational,VE:givingandtaking(added
theywantwiththeirownbodieswithoutinterference,evenif value)-ViceofExcess
thatmeansthattheywanttokillthemselves.
[Title]CMV:Idon’tseeaproblemwithpeoplevaluingtodefendtheirpropertyoveranintruderslife.
[Sentence]Whoknows,maybesheisstealinghislast1000dollarsthatwillpayhisrent.
[Interpretation] [Attitude] [MoralJudgments]
sheistakingmoneywhichdoesnotbelongtoher. verypositive she: bad,greedywoman,VE:givingandtaking(money)-
ViceofExcess.
his: good,generous,morality:givingandtaking(money)-
VirtueofMean
Perhapsthethiefisstealinganindividual’slastthousanddollars negative she: bad,dishonest,VE:ambition,honour(goal)-Viceof
thattheyneededforrent. Deficiency
his: good,innocent,VE:pride,honour(cause)-Virtueof
Mean
Weneverknowwhowearedealingwithandotherpeoplehave neutral she: bad,insensibility,VE:givingandtaking(money)-
differentproblemsthatwemightnotbeawareof. ViceofDeficiency
his:/
Muralikumar et al. [53]found that Perspective API scores align well with human ratings of toxicity, where an ordered logistic
regression showed that the toxicity score (coefficient = 3.1672) was a significant predictor of humans’ toxicity ratings (𝑝 =7.57𝑒 −13).
We therefore consider the scores reliable and representative of the malicious nature of a given text.
3.2. Disagreement on implicit judgments
The following example shows how diverse interpretations of the same sentence can be:
Sentence: And rather than built the country the ANC have used their super majority in parliament to make marxist policies a
priority.
Interpretation A: Author is supporting apartheid.
Interpretation B: The country has given importance to build up socio-economic policies.
Since annotating the presence and social evaluation of a character trait is more intuitive and therefore less prone to misconception
than the classification in a philosophical theory such as Virtue Ethics, we analyze the disagreement on implicit moral judgments
based on the annotations for presence and social evaluation.
We observe that diversification in interpretation already starts with recognizing the presence and absence of moral judgments.
For only 291 sentences (14.42%), all annotators agree that the author passed at least onejudgment. For only 56 sentences (2.78%)9,
all annotators agree that nojudgments are passed. These findings demonstrate the high degree of disagreement on the presence of
implicit moral judgments.
When annotators distinguish an implied character trait of a person entity, they show low agreement on its desirability or evalu-
ation in society – with Krippendorff’s 𝛼=.354over the annotators’ evaluations of each entity. This means that often one annotator
perceives a negative judgment of an entity’s character while another considers it positive, and vice versa. Even if they agree on its
desirability, their interpretation seems to be affected by their attitude towards the author (see Table3). Interestingly, the moral judg-
ment annotations for the second example sentence in Table3indicate that judgments can be passed for both active and passive actors
in the original sentence. Fig.3shows that most recognized character traits are considered vices. An explanation for this phenomenon
is not straightforward as it is unclear whether this is due to an actual higher frequency, higher ease of recognition and production,
or a cognitive bias towards negativity in both author and reader.
3.3. Common ground and filling in the gaps
When qualitatively comparing interpretations with the original sentences, we distinguish traces of common ground. For instance,
annotators explain abbreviations;
9 These sentences are included in the dataset, even though no implied judgments were annotated for them in the second annotation round.
7

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Fig.3.DistributionofSpheresofAction(outercircle)anddegrees(innercircle)annotatedinthedataset.(Forinterpretationofthecolorsinthefigure(s),thereader
isreferredtothewebversionofthisarticle.)
Sentence: For example it seems like a lot of people just post on Instagram and Facebook about BLMbut would they be willing to
take action in the face of racism.
Interpretation: People might support BlackLivesMatterand post about it for social media but aren’t truly activists if they wouldn’t
actually take action if they encounter racism.
recognize references to social conflicts and polarizing topics;
Sentence: If the woman physically cannot give birth, once again, this should be verified by a judge.
Interpretation: Women should not have autonomy over their own bodies.
and understand rhetorical strategies:
Sentence: Do people even know why Lenin abandoned Socialism?
Interpretation: Many people don’t know why Lenin abandoned Socialism.
We also notice that annotators actively reason over seemingly implicit information. They, for example, adhere to their own mental
representation of people to fill in social templates:
Sentence: Why that cisgender person doesn’t wish to date a trans person or why he broke up.
Interpretation: Why that cisgender person doesn’t want to date a trans person or why he broke up withher.
They sometimes assign a gender to the author – even though the author’s identity is unknown to them:
Sentence: And I’m not sure if the guy I’m seeing knows that.
Interpretation: The person is afraid of having to explain to the guy what he doesn’t know about her.
We also observed a tendency among the annotators to indicate a negative attitude towards the author of the input sentence and
to suggest that they hold different beliefs by using patterns such as “the writer/author ... claims/believes/argues that ...”. To analyze
this, we divided the interpretations of the training sentences into two groups: interpretations of sentences that start with this pattern
(Group A) and interpretations of sentences that do not (Group B). In Group A, 18.10% of the interpretations expressed a very negative
attitude towards the author, compared to only 6.93% in Group B. Similarly, 22.19% of interpretations in Group A had a negative
attitude, while 19.75% in Group B did. This behavior is exemplified below by a sentence and its interpretation written by an annotator
with a very negative opinion towards the author of the sentence.
Sentence: Even if the police had zero implicit bias (somehow), you would still have totally innocent black people killed by police
at an infinitely higher rate than white people, all because 100% of criminal suspects are black.
Interpretation: The author wrongly states that 100% of criminal suspects are black and that’s why they get killed by the police
more than white people.
Note that the interpretations could be influenced by the lack of rich context surrounding a given sentence. For instance, annotators
may not have felt the need to explain acronyms or refer to social conflicts if more context was available clarifying that information.
8

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Nevertheless, further linguistic and rhetorical analyses could identify the governing effects of common ground on interpretation and
its reflection in the interpretation’s wording but are beyond the scope of this paper.
4. Generation methods for interpretation modeling
4.1. Task definition
The goal is to generate multiple interpretations 𝑖 of an input sentence 𝑠. We assume that a reader or a representative group of
readers 𝑗each have their own interpretation 𝑖 𝑗 of 𝑠. Reader 𝑗is characterized by attitude 𝑎 𝑗 towards the author upon reading 𝑠and
the implicit moral judgments 𝑚 𝑗 they distinguish in 𝑠. The context of reader 𝑗, which we call 𝑔 𝑗=[𝑎 𝑗, 𝑚 𝑗], socially grounds 𝑠in 𝑖 𝑗.
Social context 𝑔 can be a priori obtained or inferred jointly with the generation. We assume the former in our experiments below.
For instance, a multi-task objective in the latter case would require a substantially larger number of training samples. Together with
𝑠and 𝑔, the title 𝑡𝑖of the post from which 𝑠is taken is given. We approach IM in two autoregressive generation setups.
One-to-one generation The objective is generating one interpretation 𝑖 𝑗 of sentence 𝑠by reader 𝑗based on 𝑝 𝜃(𝑖 𝑗|𝑠, 𝑡𝑖, 𝑔 𝑗). This process
is repeated 𝐽 times to obtain 𝐽 interpretations representing 𝐽 readers.
One-to-many generation 𝐽interpretations 𝑖are jointly generated conditioned on 𝑠, 𝑡𝑖, and social context 𝑔 1...𝐽, that is 𝑝 𝜃(𝑖 1...𝐽|𝑠, 𝑡𝑖, 𝑔 1...𝐽)
is computed, where 𝑖 1...𝐽 and 𝑔 1...𝐽 respectively represent a long string of 𝐽 interpretations and social contexts each delimited by a
separator token. In this setup, the context of previously generated interpretations is taken into account during generation.
4.2. Input feature representations
𝑠, 𝑡𝑖, and 𝑖are variable-length sequences composed of tokens from a vocabulary 𝑉, 𝑎is a scalar following a five-point Likert scale,
and 𝑚presents 𝑄sequences of moral judgments where 𝑄equals the number of unique people entities mentionedin 𝑠, preserving their
order of appearance: 𝑚 =((𝑒𝑛𝑡 1, 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠 1, 𝑑𝑒𝑠𝑐 1, 𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑙 1, 𝑠𝑜𝑎 1, 𝑣𝑖 1), ..., (𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑄, 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠 𝑄, 𝑑𝑒𝑠𝑐 𝑄, 𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑙 𝑄, 𝑠𝑜𝑎 𝑄, 𝑣𝑖 𝑄))– with 𝑒𝑛𝑡the person entity
as mentioned in 𝑠, 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠a binary indicator marking the presence/absence of an implied character trait, 𝑑𝑒𝑠𝑐 the trait’s description
using tokens from 𝑉, 𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑙an evaluation label (i.e., good| bad), 𝑠𝑜𝑎a sphere-of-action label, and 𝑣𝑖a contextual appropriateness label
(i.e., vice of deficiency| virtue of mean| vice of excess). The moral judgment of entity 𝑞 is then 𝑚 𝑞. If entity 𝑞 is not judged, that is
𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠 𝑞=0, 𝑚 𝑞=(𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑞, 0, “”, 0, 0, 0). We use 𝑄′∈[0, 𝑄]to indicate the number of entities 𝑞′judgedin 𝑠.
Following the success of prompting with supervised learning [48], we apply a prompting function 𝑓 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡(⋅)to jointly represent
𝑠, 𝑡𝑖, and 𝑔. This way, we lay bare the relations between the various input features. The function completes a predefined template
that contains four subtemplates (colored boxes), each designated to a specific input type. The subtemplates are joined together by
separator token <sep>:
Moral Judgments: [(𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑞′ =
Input template: title Title:𝑡𝑖 <sep> attitude Attitude:[𝑠𝑡𝑟(𝑎)]𝐽 . <sep> judgments a𝑑 c𝑒 t𝑠 e𝑐 r𝑞 ′ t, r aw ith aic nh d i as 𝑣a 𝑖 𝑞𝑒 ′𝑣 r𝑎 e𝑙 l𝑞 a′ tc eh da tr o- <sep>
𝑠𝑜𝑎 𝑞′.)𝑄′ ]𝐽
Sentence:𝑠
sentence
In the attitude subtemplate, 𝑠𝑡𝑟(⋅) maps 𝑎 from its scalar value to its attitude label (i.e., {1: very negative, 2: negative, 3: neutral,
4: positive, 5: very positive}). In the judgments subtemplate, the phrase in parentheses is repeated 𝑄′ times. If 𝑄′=0, then “Moral
Judgments: None”. Various input templates of different input lengths, label ordering, and phrasings have been crafted, tested, and
evaluated when designing the input template. The final template is designed in such a way that it makes the relation between the
various labels explicit through text and the subtemplates can be automatically adapted when labels are missing.10
The prompting template is used across all generation settings. For aggregating the social context 𝑔 1...𝐽 over 𝐽 readers, the phrases
in squared brackets ([]) in the attitude and judgments subtemplate are repeated 𝐽 times such that the attitude and moral judgment
of reader 𝑗 are aligned by their position in the input template. The input template or string is encoded with a pre-trained language
model.
4.3. One-to-one generation
Decoder A single interpretation 𝑖 𝑗 is generated conditioned on 𝑠, 𝑡𝑖, and 𝑔 𝑗; 𝑝 𝜃(𝑖 𝑗|𝑠, 𝑡𝑖, 𝑔 𝑗). This process is repeated 𝐽 times for each
reader 𝑗to obtain 𝐽 interpretations representing 𝐽 readers.
10 In rare cases, one or more variables in 𝑚are lacking, then the part between slashes (//) to which the missing variable belongs is removed from the judgment
subtemplate: 𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑞′= /𝑑𝑒𝑠𝑐 𝑞′, which is/ /a 𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑙 𝑞′ character trait and/ /a 𝑣𝑖 𝑞′/ /related to 𝑠𝑜𝑎 𝑞′/ to maintain a naturally occurring sentence.
9

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Training The model parameters are optimized using the standard language modeling objective, that is a negative log-likelihood loss:
∑𝐽 ∏𝐿
1
 1=− 𝐿log 𝑝 𝜃(𝑖 𝑗,𝑡|𝑖 𝑗,<𝑡,𝑠,𝑡𝑖,𝑔 𝑗) (1)
𝑗=1 𝑡=1
where 𝐿refers to the number of tokens in target interpretation 𝑖 𝑗.[One2One]
4.4. One-to-many generation
Decoder The generated output is a sequence of 𝐽 interpretations 𝑖 𝑗 concatenated by a special reader token forming 𝑖 1...𝐽 =
𝑖 1<reader>𝑖 1+1...<reader>𝑖 𝐽. The model is expected to infer 𝐽 from the 𝐽 contexts given in the input template.
Training Model parameters are optimized using a negative log-likelihood loss:
∏𝑇
1
 𝑚=− log 𝑝 𝜃(𝑖 𝑡|𝑖 <𝑡,𝑠,𝑡𝑖,𝑔 1...𝐽) (2)
𝑇
𝑡=1
where 𝑇 is the number of tokens of the target string of the decoder that contains all interpretations. The decoding is conditioned on
previously generated interpretations. Autoregressive decoding is affected by the order in which the interpretations are generated and
consequently optimized. For this, we develop control mechanisms derived from the properties of interpretation.
4.4.1. Arbitrary ordering
During training mode, parameters are optimized using a arbitrary ordering of the ground truth interpretations, that is the ordering
in which they appear in the dataset.[One2M-Arb]
4.4.2. Ordering by semantic similarity
The ground-truth interpretations in 𝑖 1...𝐽 are ordered by their semantic similarity to 𝑠. This follows the assumption that the more
covert or surprising a hidden meaning is, the more complex the reasoning for recovering it becomes, and the greater its semantic
distance from the sentence’s apparent semantics. Low semantic similarity between a sentence and an interpretation then signals
high covertness of the hidden meaning while high similarity suggests low covertness. We approximate covertness using the semantic
similarity between 𝑖 𝑗 and 𝑠. Low similarity signals high covertness, and vice versa. Therefore, if 𝑠𝑖𝑚(𝑖 𝑗, 𝑠) >𝑠𝑖𝑚(𝑖 𝑘≠𝑗, 𝑠), the hidden
meaning governing 𝑖 𝑘is considered more covert than that in 𝑖 𝑗. Naturally, a ranking 𝑟: 𝑠𝑖𝑚(𝑖 𝑗, 𝑠) >𝑠𝑖𝑚(𝑖 𝑘, 𝑠)→ ←← 𝑟(𝑖 𝑗) >𝑟(𝑖 𝑘). Ultimately,
the interpretations composing 𝑖 1...𝐽 are ordered in descending order following 𝑟during optimization. Semantic similarity 𝑠𝑖𝑚(⋅, ⋅)is
based on the cosine similarity and takes representations computed by SimCSE [24]as it was shown to align best with human evaluation
of semantic similarity [80].[One2M-Sim]
4.4.3. Constraining on semantic similarity
In addition to the above ordering of ground-truth interpretations in 𝑖 1...𝐽, a decrease in semantic similarity of the generated
interpretations in 𝑖̂ 1...𝐽 to 𝑠 is explicitly enforced during training. The decoded interpretation sequence 𝑖̂ 1...𝐽 is split in sentences,
where sentence 𝑖̂ 𝑗 presents the predicted interpretation for reader 𝑗. Next, a language model computes a latent representation of
𝑖̂ 𝑗 and 𝑠, called respectively 𝑖′ 𝑗 and 𝑠′, after which their semantic similarity is computed. Related to previous work on abstractive
summarization [49], a contrastive loss function  𝑠𝑖𝑚 based on a hinge loss enforces a decrease in semantic similarity with 𝑠′ among
the predicted interpretations 𝑖′ :
1...𝐽
∑𝐽
1
 𝑠𝑖𝑚= 𝓁(𝑠′,𝑖′ 𝑗,𝑖′ 𝑗-1) (3)
𝐽
𝑗=2
where
𝓁(𝑠′,𝑖′ 𝑗,𝑖′ 𝑗-1)=max(0,𝑠𝑖𝑚(𝑖′ 𝑗,𝑠′)−𝑠𝑖𝑚(𝑖′ 𝑗-1,𝑠′)+𝑚) (4)
with margin 𝑚forcing a substantial difference between the generated interpretations. SimCSE and cosine similarity are again used
for computing 𝑠𝑖𝑚(⋅, ⋅).
Model parameters are optimized using a weighted combination of the language modeling and similarity decrease objective: ∗∗=
𝛼 𝑚+(1 −𝛼) 𝑠𝑖𝑚. This way, we can explicitly control the trade-off between both losses.[One2M-Con]Losses are summed over 𝑁
training sentences.
4.5. Alternative decoding models
There are many possibilities of designing a decoder that generates different interpretations during training. We also experimented
with models that used context 𝑔 𝑗 as a prompt to autoregressively decode the interpretation both in the one-to-one and one-to-many
settings instead of using 𝑔 𝑗 as input together with 𝑠and 𝑡𝑖. In the one-to-many case, this leads to a multi-branch decoder [67]with
10

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
𝐽 parallel decoders where each 𝑗𝑡ℎ decoder autoregressively generates 𝑖 𝑗 taking 𝑔 𝑗 as decoder prompt. Alternatively, we designed an
additional loss function that during training enforces the similarity of a generated interpretation with 𝑔 𝑗. None of these approaches
could improve the results, often yielding nonsensical interpretations that disproportionately focused on 𝑔 𝑗.
5. Experiments
In this section, we describe the experimental setup and the metrics used for evaluating the performance of the proposed generation
frameworks on the IM task. We then continue to thoroughly investigate the success of the frameworks and the importance of IM for
content moderation. To that end, we formulate and answer several pertinent research questions in §6, §7, and §8.
5.1. Experimental setup
𝑝 𝜃 is parameterized by large pre-trained language models: decoder-only forward language model GPT-211 [64] and encoder-
decoder architecture T512 [65]. Model parameters are optimized using Adam optimization (lr=1𝑒−6, weightdecay=0.01, 𝜖=
1𝑒−8, 𝛽 =0.9, 𝛽 =0.99) with batch size = 2 and gradient clipping (maxnorm=0.1). During training, early stopping is performed
1 2
on the validation loss with patience =5. We adopt diverse beam search [78](max. length = 150, beamsize=10, beamgroups=
5, diversitypenalty=2.0, repetitionpenalty=1.2) with early stopping as the standard decoding method and use the interpretation
with the highest probability in the beam as output. In [One2M-Con], we also test with greedy search as decoding method for produc-
ing interpretations during training. We set margin 𝑚 =.05in  𝑠𝑖𝑚 to ensure that the last generated interpretation still relates to the
original sentence. Data is split in a train (80%), test (10%), and validation (10%) set in a title-stratified manner, ensuring sentences
from the same post are represented in the same set.13We experiment with various values for hyperparameter 𝛼∈[.25, .50, .75].
5.2. Evaluation metrics
We report the lexical overlap between the generated and target interpretations using BLEU [58] and ROUGE [43], and their
semantic similarity using MoverScore [89]and BERTScore [88]. COMET14 [69,68]is a trained metric that projects the sentences,
generated interpretations, and ground-truth interpretations in a shared feature space, combines their latent representations into a
single vector, and produces a score between 0 and 1 reflecting the quality of the generated interpretation. We also compute unigram-
based perplexity. We opt for reference-based metrics, where the generated interpretations are compared against the expected ground-
truth interpretations, since we aim to generate human-like interpretations and scores yielded by reference-free metrics have been
shown to misalign with this goal [14]. In one-to-one generation, each generated interpretation is evaluated against their respective
target interpretation. In one-to-many generation, we first match each interpretation in the generated sequence of interpretations with
one target interpretation in the target sequence. For this, we employ the Kuhn-Munkres algorithm [40], also known as the Hungarian
algorithm, which is a combinatorial optimization algorithm that efficiently pairs predictions and targets by computing their matching.
Here, 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒(⋅) =100 −BLEU-1is used for scoring the matches. We then evaluate each generated and target pair, as done in one-to-one
generation.
6. Quantitative results
RQ 1.Which of the proposed generation frameworks is most appropriate for IM?
Performance results on the held-out test set are provided in Table4. The T5-based models outperform those adopting GPT-2 as
backbone language model on almost all metrics. This can be explained by the better encoding and cross-attention between decoder
and encoder in the encoder-decoder model of T5. This advantage is consistent across the one-to-one and one-to-many generation
setups. The task is not just autoregressively completing the input sentence with an interpretation as done in a decoder model such
as GPT-2, but to translate the input sentence into the viewpoint and language of the reader for which both a good encoding of the
content of the input is needed as well as a decoding step that cross-attends over the encodings of the input sentence.
Comparing the two generation setups, we notice that one-to-one generation shows overall better performance than one-to-many
generation. This is to be expected as the generation of each interpretation is guided by its own input template or prompt in the one-
to-one generation setup. The one-to-many generation models, on the other hand, have to learn to generate different interpretations
and to attend to the corresponding context in the input template. Adding implicit ([One2M-Sim]) control by ordering interpretations
based on their semantic similarity to the sentence in the ground truth slightly improves performance, suggesting that the order in
which the ground-truth interpretations are presented during optimization indeed affects generation. Explicitly enforcing a decreasing
11 GPT2-Large; Huggingface implementation of GPT2LMHeadModel.
12 T5-Base; Huggingface implementation of T5ForConditionalGeneration.
13 Using Scikit-LearnGroupKFold.
14 https://huggingface .co /Unbabel /wmt22 -comet -da.
11

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Table4
Experimentaltestresults.PP=Perplexity;DBS=diversebeamsearch;greedy=greedysearch.ForBERTScore,wereportF1scores.BestresultswithGPT-2
asencoderbackbonelanguagemodel(‘-GPT’)areinboldandbestresultswithT5asencoder-decoderbackbonelanguagemodel(‘-T5’)areunderlined.
𝛼 BLEU ROUGE Mover BERT COMET↑ PP↓
Values 1/2/3/4↑ 1/2/L/Lsum↑ Score↑ Score↑
One-to-OneGeneration
One2One-GPT - 8.23/2.62/1.04/.46 16.58/2.34/11.33/12.91 .0055 .9568 .5239 16.24
One2One-T5 - 31.64/24.12/18.34/14.71 42.01/20.24/37.40/37.50 .3231 .9714 .6749 8.78
One-to-ManyGeneration
One2M-Arb-GPT - 11.60/3.07/1.13/.36 15.05/1.40/11.08/11.15 .0128 .9623 .4922 21.50
One2M-Sim-GPT - 12.49/3.44/1.16/.42 15.23/1.60/11.30/11.38 .0081 .9625 .4803 21.16
One2M-Con-GPT .25(DBS) 12.75/3.35/1.32/.59 14.57/1.29/11.31/11.35 .0133 .9639 .4823 8.87
.50(DBS) 11.84/3.13/1.29/.60 13.37/1.38/10.52/10.56 .0032 .9646 .4586 11.71
.75(DBS) 11.94/3.29/1.35/.58 13.94/1.46/10.81/10.86 -.0029 .9642 .4593 14.90
.25(greedy) 11.97/3.10/1.21/.57 14.18/1.37/11.05/11.10 .0069 .9644 .4757 8.48
.50(greedy) 11.70/2.83/.96/.35 15.38/1.58/11.55/11.61 .0157 .9618 .5048 13.65
.75(greedy) 11.63/3.06/1.13/.41 14.12/1.47/10.75/10.78 -.0001 .9628 .4769 19.17
One2M-Arb-T5 - 32.25/22.51/17.81/14.75 38.07/18.68/32.67/32.75 .2964 .9626 .6226 9.59
One2M-Sim-T5 - 32.44/22.29/17.70/14.80 36.42/17.40/31.30/31.37 .2944 .9630 .6194 9.01
One2M-Con-T5 .25(DBS) 25.95/18.11/14.45/12.12 27.63/12.54/23.66/23.73 .1758 .9647 .5292 15.93
.50(DBS) 27.10/18.83/14.97/12.47 29.40/13.83/25.06/25.14 .1893 .9646 .5430 14.62
.75(DBS) 27.03/18.81/15.00/12.57 28.20/13.15/24.13/24.20 .1770 .9646 .5352 13.50
.25(greedy) 25.48/17.51/13.81/11.46 27.04/12.36/23.25/23.29 .1688 .9647 .5255 14.50
.50(greedy) 26.29/18.33/14.53/12.09 28.21/13.46/24.30/24.36 .1805 .9645 .5417 13.35
.75(greedy) 25.98/17.79/14.10/11.79 27.39/12.43/23.40/23.46 .1725 .9651 .5288 12.37
semantic similarity between the sentence and the generated interpretations in one-to-many generation ([One2M-Con]) yields overall
performance that is either similar to or worse than the setting without additional control ([One2M-Arb]). Lastly, the choice of decoding
method (i.e., diverse beam search and greedy search) does not seem to substantially influence generation performance.
Note that automatic evaluation metrics are known for poorly correlating with human evaluation. We therefore further analyze
and assess the models and their generated interpretations in human evaluation setups (§7).
RQ 2.Did the models learn to correlate the diversity in interpretation with the diversity in social grounding?
The difference between interpretations of a sentence is linked with a difference in social grounding, among other things. The IM
models should therefore have learned to diversify the interpretations if their grounding information differs while generating similar
interpretations with similar social grounding. We quantify the lexical difference between two interpretations from readers 𝑗and 𝑘as
𝑑𝑖(𝑖 𝑗, 𝑖 𝑘).
𝑑𝑖(𝑖 𝑗,𝑖 𝑘)=100−BLEU-1(𝑖 𝑗,𝑖 𝑘) (5)
We then obtain the difference in grounding information guiding 𝑖 𝑗 and 𝑖 𝑘, respectively 𝑔 𝑗 and 𝑔 𝑘, by simply summing their difference
in attitude and moral judgments:
∑𝑄
1
𝑑𝑔(𝑔 𝑗,𝑔 𝑘)=|𝑎 𝑗−𝑎 𝑘|+ 𝑛𝑜𝑛_𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑙𝑎𝑝(𝑚 𝑗,𝑞,𝑚 𝑘,𝑞) (6)
𝑄
𝑞=1
where |𝑎 𝑗 −𝑎 𝑘| represents the difference in Likert scores (see § 4.2) (min. 0, max. 4) and 𝑛𝑜𝑛_𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑙𝑎𝑝(𝑚 𝑗, 𝑚 𝑘) counts the non-
overlapping moral judgment characteristics for each entity 𝑞 (min. 0, max. 5). Thus, 𝑑𝑔(𝑔 𝑗, 𝑔 𝑘) ∈[0, 9], so that 𝑑𝑔(𝑔 𝑗, 𝑔 𝑘) =0means
that reader 𝑗 and reader 𝑘 have the exact same attitude and distinguish for all 𝑄 entities the exact same moral judgments, and
𝑑𝑔(𝑔 𝑗, 𝑔 𝑘) =9 means that they have highly opposing attitudes (i.e., very negative (𝑎 =1) and very positive (𝑎 =5)) and disagree
completely on the implied moral judgments. As expected, diversity in social grounding 𝑑𝑔 is positively correlated (Pearson) with
diversity in interpretation 𝑑𝑖 (𝑝 <.01). The positive correlation is stronger with One2One-GPT (𝑟 =.5526) than with One2One-T5
(𝑟 =.3321) and approaches that of the gold standard (𝑟 =.5887). Note that correlation is only computed for the one-to-one generation
settings since the interpretations align with the grounding information they rely on.
At first sights it seems that GPT-based models better leverage the grounding information than those adopting T5. However,
Table4shows a much better correspondence of the interpretations generated by One2M-Sim-T5 than by One2M-Sim-GPT. Qualitative
inspection described in the next paragraph notices a higher degree of hallucinations by GPT-2 which might explain the higher diversity
when dealing with diverse social grounding.
12

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Table5
Exampleofgeneratedandground-truthinterpretationsofasentencetakenfromthetestset.
Sentence Ihearalotaboutadultsjobjumpingnowadaysjusttogetbiggerwages,andhonestly?
One2M-Sim-GPT (1)Jobsarejumpingtodayjustforthesakeofgettingbiggerpaychecks,butIdon’thearmuch
aboutit.(2)author=ajobisjumpingbecauseit’stheonlywaytomakealiving,notbecauseof
anyotherreason.(3)writer=jobhoppingbecausetheywanttobeabletoaffordtoliveinabig
city,sotheycanaffordabiggerhouse,car,etc.,andsoon.(4)sentence:Itseemslikethejob
markethasgonebackintimetothedaysofthebabyboomers,whenadultswerethemain
breadwinnersandneededtohaveastablejobtosupporttheirfamilies.
One2M-Sim-T5 (1)Peoplenowadaysarejumpingintojobsjusttogethigherwages.(2)Ihearalotaboutadults
jobjumpingnowadaysjustforbiggerwages,andhonestly?(3)Thewriterasksifadultsarenow
jumpinginjobstoearnmoremoney(4)Adultsaregettingricher
Groundtruth (1)Adultsarechangingjobsforbiggerpaychecks.(2)Thewriterdescribeshavingheardabout
manypeoplechangingjobstogethigherwages.(3)Peopleswitchingjobsforbetterwagesisa
realawfulsituationnowadays.(4)Peopleareonlyinterestedinmoneyandnotstability.(5)
Capitalpursuitisnotworthmoralsacrifice.
Table6
Overviewoftheevaluationlabelsfordiversityandmeaningwiththeir
scoresusedduringthehumanevaluationtasks.
Diversity Meaning
0:Notdiverseatall 0:Exactcopies
1:Slightlydiverse 1:Thesamemeaning
2:Moderatelydiverse 2:Slightlydifferentmeanings
3:Verydiverse 3:Moderatelydifferentmeanings
4:Extremelydiverse 4:Verydifferentmeanings,stillrelated
5:Oppositemeanings,stillrelated
6:Unrelatedmeanings
7. Human evaluation
In a first qualitative evaluation, we manually inspect all generated interpretations of the test set. Table5shows an example. We
notice that the one-to-many generation models with T5 overall generate more diverse interpretations than their one-to-one generation
counterpart, One2One-T5. The one-to-one generated interpretations stay rather close to the semantics of the sentence. With GPT-2,
diversity is generally higher than with T5 in both generation setups. However, we observe a high degree of hallucination and nonsense
with GPT-2 (e.g., “jobs are jumping”). With both language models and all generation methods, the generated interpretations sometimes
lack the level of complex reasoning that guided the target interpretations (e.g., ground-truth interpretation (4) and (5) in Table5).
We also perform a systematic quantitative human evaluation. We hire two students with a bachelor degree in English linguistics to
assess the ground-truth and generated interpretations for 100 randomly sampled sentences from the test set in more detail. Detailed
descriptions of the assessors are provided in the Appendix (§A.4). We take the interpretations generated by One2M-Sim-T5 since
quantitative and qualitative results suggest that it generates the highest-quality interpretations. The assessors can leave free-text
comments during evaluation, and we conduct a 45-minute interview with each assessor separately at the end of the assessment.
RQ 3.Is an automatic model able to generate interpretations that are diverse in meaning? And does that diversity align with the diversity
found in the annotated ground truth?
We want to evaluate a model’s ability to generate diverse interpretations and check whether the generation model has learned to
reason over the ambiguous nature of a sentence and diversify the generated set of interpretations accordingly. The human assessors
first evaluate the diversity of 100 sets of generated and ground-truth interpretations randomly selected from the test set in terms of
the meaning they represent. The sets are interchangeably presented to them as ‘SET A’ and ‘SET B’. They indicate for each set the
diversity on a five-point Likert scale, see Table6for thediversitylabels. We show the sets next to each other such that their diversity is
indirectly compared against each other. Inter-rater agreement is fair, with Cohen’s weighted (quadratic) kappa 𝜅=.30(ground-truth
set) and 𝜅=.34(generated set). Both assessors indicate in the interviews that it is cognitively challenging to assess the difference in
meaning between multiple sentences in a set. This could explain why agreement between the two assessors is only fair. Whereas one
assessor does not observe significantly different diversity in the ground-truth and generated interpretation sets, respectively 𝜇=1.83
and 𝜇=1.91, the other assigns overall higher diversity in the generated interpretation sets, 𝜇=1.69 (ground truth) and 𝜇=2.32
(generated), 𝑝 <.01. See Fig.4for the diversity score distributions for both assessors. The two diversity distributions for the generated
interpretations as assessed by the two assessors suggest that the model is overall able to generate moderately diverse interpretation
sets, which are in line with the overall diversity found in the ground truth.
13

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Fig.4.Histogramsshowingthediversityscoredistributionsfortheground-truthinterpretationsets(ontheleft)andthegeneratedinterpretationsets(ontheright).
Theorangedistributions(hatchingpattern:/)presentthefirstassessorandthebluedistributions(hatchingpattern:+)thesecondassessor. (Forinterpretationofthe
colorsinthefigure(s),thereaderisreferredtothewebversionofthisarticle.)
We examine whether the model is able to capture the diversity in interpretation triggered by a sentence. Given the fairly low inter-
rater agreement, we analyze the Pearson correlation between the diversity scores for the ground-truth and generated interpretation
sets for each assessor separately. The correlation is positive – weak (first assessor; 𝑟 =.17) or negligible (second assessor; 𝑟 =.04)
– though not statistically significant, 𝑝 >.05. The model seems to generate more diverse interpretation sets for sentences that have
less diverse ground-truth interpretation sets while it slightly better captures the implicit diversity for sentences with more diverse
ground-truth sets.
RQ 4.Do the generated sentences actually present interpretations or merely rewrites?
We want to analyze whether the generated interpretations are actually interpretations and not merely copies (‘exact copies’),
paraphrases (‘the same meaning’), or unrelated to the sentence (‘unrelated meanings’). We broadly consider a generated sentence
an interpretation if it presents a different meaning that is still related to the sentence since a paraphrase is expected to maintain
the sentence’s semantics. The assessors are given 361 sentence-interpretation pairs presented as ‘A’ and ‘B’ and asked to label the
difference in meaning between the sentence and the interpretation. See Table 6 for the meaning labels. We observe substantial
inter-rater agreement: 𝜅=.72. Fig.5presents the meaning distributions. It seems that One2M-Sim-T5 often copies (7-13%) or nearly
copies/paraphrases (18%) the original sentence. The assessors sometimes motivate their choice of the latter in the comments: the
difference between the sentences is marginal (i.e., omission of function words or articles, typos, or contractions) or one sentence is
simply a paraphrase of the other. In rare cases, the model generates sentences that are unrelated to the original sentence (2-3%).
Nevertheless, it is overall able to generate interpretations as the majority of generated sentences have been said to differ in meaning
from the original sentences in various degrees. The assessors note that a difference in meaning is often established by nuances in
word semantics.
8. Use case: interpretation modeling for content moderation
Interpretations of the input sentence have the potential to reveal implicit toxic content that may not have been inferred by all
readers instantly. An author could have hidden that content on purpose when they have malicious intentions. We therefore showcase
the meaningful contributions IM can make to content moderation of online discussions by revealing subtly toxic communication. To
that end, we analyze and compare the levels of toxicity, insult, and identity attack within sentences, considering the ground-truth
interpretations provided by the human annotators and the interpretations generated by one of the proposed IM models. Scores on
toxicity, insult, and identity attack are obtained through the Perspective API.
The following two research questions are answered employing similar analyses, with RQ5 focusing on the ground-truth interpre-
tations in the training set and RQ6 concentrating on the generated interpretations produced by One2M-Sim-T5 for sentences in the
test set. The analyses also introduce the concept of an interpretation cluster that combines the input sentence and its corresponding
interpretations into one set. The input sentence namely retains its significance and should therefore be considered together with the
interpretations in real-life content moderation settings. We perform the following primary analyses:
• Analysis 1 - The revealing nature of interpretation. We investigate if the interpretations reveal underlying toxicity, insults, and
identity attacks in the input sentence. To that end, we compute a toxicity, insult, and identity attack score for each instance in
14

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Fig.5.Histogramshowingthemeaningscoredistributionforthesentence-(generated)interpretationpairs.Theorangedistribution(hatchingpattern:/)presentsthe
evaluationofthefirstassessorandthebluedistribution(hatchingpattern:+)thatofthesecondassessor.(Forinterpretationofthecolorsinthefigure(s),thereader
isreferredtothewebversionofthisarticle.)
the interpretation cluster and flag the input sentence if an interpretation yields the maximum toxicity, insult, or identity attack
score in the interpretation cluster. The difference in score between the input sentence and that interpretation can be of any value
(analysis 1A) or at least 10 percentage points, marking a substantial difference (analysis 1B). This value is selected to represent
the largest jump in the distribution of the differences between the maximum toxicity scores of the interpretations and the toxicity
scores of their corresponding input sentences (first line of Fig.6and Fig.7).
• Analysis 2 -Harmless on the surface but very offensive between the lines. The analysis of the interpretations is especially important
when the original sentence has low levels of toxicity, insult, or identity attack and its interpretation cluster contains one or more
interpretations with a high toxicity, insult, or identity attack score. We flag an input sentence when it has a score below 0.1
and at least one interpretation in its interpretation cluster has a score above 0.5. Note that we deliberately choose to set the
distance between the upper bound of the sentence score (<0.1) and the lower bound of the interpretation score (>0.5) to be
substantially large here. In practice, content moderators could choose those bounds, allowing them to decide how strictly they
moderate implicitly toxic, insulting, and attacking content.
In conjunction with the primary analyses, we investigate the ability of the IM model to adequately replicate human interpretation
behavior in RQ6 (Model vs humans). This entails assessing the agreement or overlap between the flagged sentences in the test set when
considering the generated interpretations (= model behavior) and when considering the ground-truth interpretations (= human
behavior) in the interpretation clusters. This is done by first obtaining the outcomes of the two primary analyses for the generated
and ground-truth clusters separately, after which we quantify their overlap as a percentage. The overlap represents the proportion
of the original sentences that should be flagged according to the ground-truth interpretations (written by humans) that the model
was able to flag as well using the interpretations it produced. An overlap of 80%, for instance, signifies that the model flagged 80%
of the sentences that were also flagged by humans in the ground-truth sentences. The reason why we rely on recall for our analyses
is because false negative cases are more relevant than false positives. In content moderation, it is worse to fail to recognize a toxic
interpretation (false negative) than to mistakenly label a non-toxic interpretation as toxic (false positive). This hypothesis also holds
true for interpretations that contain insults and identity attacks. The higher the overlap, the better the model is at mimicking the
interpretation behavior of humans.
RQ 5.Do interpretations given by humans actually reveal the hidden toxic nature of sentences?
Analysis 1 -the revealing nature of interpretation As observed in Fig.6, the ground-truth interpretations have a strong capacity to flag
the hidden offensive meaning of an input sentence. In 88.63%, 88.51%, and 90.86% of the cases, a sentence has at least one more
toxic, insulting, and attacking interpretation in its interpretation cluster. The difference between the most offensive interpretation
and the sentence is however marginal in most cases (analysis 1A). Nonetheless, this difference is at least 10 percentage points in
33.96%, 21.74%, and 23.85% of the clusters, suggesting that these clusters unveil hidden meanings that are substantially more toxic,
insulting, or attacking than the meanings the input sentences explicitly communicate (analysis 1B).
Analysis 2 -harmless on the surface but very offensive between the lines Assuming that the sentences with non-harmful language have
a toxicity, insult, or identity attack level lower than 0.1 (812 sentences for toxicity, 1265 for insult, and 1190 for identity attack), we
15

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Fig.6.Thehistogramsinthefirstrowdisplaythedifferencesbetweenthemaximumscoresfortoxicity,insult,andidentityattackintheinterpretationsandthescores
reportedforthecorrespondingsentencesinthetrainingdataset.Thesecondrowshowsscatterplotscomparingthescoresofthetrainingsentenceswiththemaximum
scoresoftheirinterpretations.Analyzingtheinterpretationshelpsinunderstandingthehiddentoxicmeaningoftheinputsentences,asthemaximumscoresofthe
interpretationclustersareusuallyhigherthanthescoresoftheinputsentences(thedifferencespresentedinthehistogramsofthefirstrowaregenerallypositive).
Thisbehaviorisparticularlyimportantwhenthescoresoftheinputsentencesarelowwhilethemaximumscoresoftheinterpretationclustersarehigh(asillustrated
bythescatterplotsinthesecondrow).
observe that .3%, .4%, and .7% of the seemingly non-harmful sentences have at least one interpretation with a toxicity, insult, and
identity attack score higher than 0.5 (second row of Fig.6). It is not surprising that these percentages are low. Since the metrics used
in the Perspective API produce scores that represent the share of people who would regard a sentence as toxic, insulting, or attacking,
it is expected that sentences that are initially considered non-harmful induce human interpretations that are mainly non-harmful as
well. These results show that we are able to capture subtly embedded misbehavior that would otherwise remain undetected through
IM. Although the <1%share of implicitly toxic sentences seems marginal at first, the number of sentences can become considerably
large in online environments.
Conclusion These findings posit that humans indeed extrapolate implicit toxicity more prominently in the ground-truth interpre-
tations, even when it is subtly embedded in an apparently harmless sentence, empirically substantiating our claim that modeling
multiple interpretations of textual content makes sense within the context of content moderation.
RQ 6.Are the generated interpretations able to reveal the hidden meaning of an input sentence? And does the IM model mimic human
interpretation patterns?
Analysis 1 -the revealing nature of interpretation We notice that the model is able to reveal the hidden meaning of the input sentence
(first row of Fig.7). It generates more toxic, insulting, and attacking interpretations for 81.86%, 80.39%, and 87.25% of the sentences
in the test set (analysis 1A). In 13.73%, 7.84%, and 9.80% of the interpretation clusters, an interpretation yields a toxicity, insult, or
identity attack score that is more than 10 percentage points higher than that of the sentence (analysis 1B).
Model vs human The model seems to be able to mimic human behavior as observed in the corresponding ground-truth interpretations
produced by humans in the test set (third row of Fig.7). Regarding analysis 1A, the flagged sentences with generated interpretations in
their interpretation clusters and those with ground-truth interpretations in their interpretation clusters overlap by 85.29% (toxicity),
83.91% (insult), and 90.45% (identity attack).15The high overlap values are to be expected since the number of flags with both the
generated and ground-truth clusters is large. Regarding analysis 1B, the flagged sentences overlap by 26.23% (toxicity), 20.0% (insult),
15 The scores evaluate the overlap using recall. Precision and F1 scores are presented in AppendixA.5.
16

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Fig.7.Thehistogramsinthefirstandthirdrowsdisplaythedifferencesbetweenthemaximumscoresfortoxicity,insult,andidentityattackintheinterpretations
andthescoresreportedforthecorrespondingsentences.Thescatterplotsinthesecondandfourthrowscomparethescoresofthesentenceswiththemaximumscores
oftheirinterpretations.Theplotsinthefirstandsecondrowsrepresenttheground-truthtestinterpretations,whilethoseinthethirdandfourthrowsrepresentthe
generatedinterpretations.Overall,thescoresoftheground-truthandgeneratedinterpretationsaregenerallysimilar,particularlyinthecaseofidentityattack(as
illustratedbythesimilarIdentityAttackhistogramsinthefirstandthirdrows).One2M-Sim-T5cangenerateinterpretationswithtoxicityandinsultscoressimilar
tothoseoftheground-truthtestinterpretations.However,itcansometimesbeinfluencedbythescoresoftheinputsentence,asindicatedbythehighpeaksinthe
toxicityandinsulthistogramsinthethirdrowandbythecasesillustratednearthemaindiagonalinthescatterplotsofthefourthrow.
17

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
and 41.67% (identity attack).15 While the rather low overlap values could be attributed to the low numbers of flagged sentences
and possible hallucinations by the generation model, they could also be caused by the limited number of human interpretations in
the ground-truth interpretation sets. It is namely reasonable that a sentence is indeed offensive between the lines, but the ground-
truth interpretations were unable to capture this. This is demonstrated by computing the overlap as a precision metric in Table 9,
AppendixA.5. The much higher precision values than the recall values show the interpretations generated by One2M-Sim-T5 can
sometimes reveal more hidden meanings than the ground-truth interpretations. This behavior is also illustrated in Table 7, where
generated interpretations with a higher toxicity, insult, or identity attack score are plausible even when the ground-truth interpretation
sets do not reveal any offensive content underlying the sentences.
Analysis 2 -harmless on the surface but very offensive between the lines Assuming again that the sentences with non-harmful language
have a toxicity, insult, and identity attack score lower than 0.1 (111 sentences for toxicity, 168 for insult, and 178 for identity attack),
we observe that One2M-Sim-T5 generates at least one interpretation that has a toxicity, insult, or identity attack score that is higher
than 0.5 for fewer than 1% of the sentences (fourth row of Fig.7). Especially in settings where constant streams of textual content
are moderated, the number of implicitly harmful sentences becomes considerably large. Note that these results are in line with those
in RQ5, proving that the model does not simply recognize harm in every single sentence it interprets.
Model vs human We observe no overlap between the behavior of the human annotators in the respective ground-truth interpretations
and that of One2M-Sim-T5, which could be attributed to the low share of flagged sentences.
We briefly investigate the capability of One2M-Sim-T5 to generate spontaneous interpretations even when the language of the sen-
tences and the human-produced interpretations are not very offensive. We do this by looking at the interpretation clusters containing
a sentence with low scores and generated interpretations with diverging scores for toxicity, insult, and identity attack. As one can
see in Table7, the model is able to recognize sensitive topics (like political voting) even when the content of the input sentences
is formulated in a neutral way. Based on the identified sensitive topics, it can generate diverse interpretations. Another interesting
behavior is the creativity of One2M-Sim-T5 that relies on concepts learned during training to extrapolate the meaning of a simple
sentence like But the Democrats?into insulting interpretations.
An important concern for recent language generation models is the generation of ethical, non-harmful content. While ethical
content generation is crucial for preventing the spread of harmful or toxic language, it may also limit the ability of such models
to reveal underlying malicious meanings in sentences. This is illustrated in Table7, which contains a few interpretations generated
by ChatGPT.16 Consistent with the interpretations produced by One2M-Sim-T5, ChatGPT reinterprets the input sentence while also
considering the title of the post, the moral judgments about the people mentioned, and the attitude towards the author. While One2M-
Sim-T5 can signal malicious hidden meanings, ChatGPT prioritizes ethical standards, generating aligned and ethical interpretations
with low toxicity, insult, and identity attack scores. Given the context of content moderation, overlooking or underemphasizing
malicious content, as seen with more recent models like ChatGPT, may not be desirable.
Conclusion The model generates interpretations that unveil toxicity hidden below the surface, demonstrating the important appli-
cation of IM in content moderation. Although interpretation mismatches between the model and the human annotators were found,
we show that the model produces interpretations that overall mimic how humans interpret sentences.
9. Related work
We position this work and its contributions in the literature dealing with computational methods for implicit language modeling,
social grounding and moral reasoning, reaction modeling, and reasoning over multiple ground truths. We conclude this section by
contrasting IM with diverse paraphrase generation.
Implicit communication The use of implicit content and knowledge has attracted attention for processing natural language [34].
For example, hidden information in language has been leveraged to allow models to distinguish more subtle cases of hate speech
[18,57,35]and online abuse [82]. Such works primarily performed classification on texts that knowingly or unknowingly conceal
their hateful and abusive character, with or without using external knowledge. Related to that is the work on implicit sentiment
analysis [42,90]. Others aimed to retrieve implicit in-text and out-of-text knowledge to reveal discourse relations [83,85], event
arguments [47,44], or reasoning steps for question answering [25]. This was commonly done in classification and generation setups,
where the implicit content was explicitly queried. Another line of work reasoned over implicit relations within or between texts to
improve general task performance. For example, Allein et al. [2]and Allein et al. [4]leveraged implicit temporal relations within
and between documents for improving fact-checking while Collell et al. [12]reasoned over implicit spatial arrangements of objects
mentioned in captions for improving visual object detection. Closer to this work, Sap et al. [71] zoomed in on social and power
implications in text. They classified the intentionally offensive and lewd nature of a sentence and then generated the supposedly
implied statement regarding the offended group. We discuss related works on implicit social communication more extensively below.
This work stands out from the abovementioned works in two aspects. Firstly, it goes against the general assumption that there exists
a single ground truth for implicit data, arguing that computational understanding of implicit content unavoidably goes hand in hand
16 https://openai .com /index /chatgpt/.
18

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Table7
Threesamplesfromthetestdatasetthatillustratethediversityofthegeneratedinterpretationsintermsoftoxicity,insult,andidentityattack.
[Sentence] [Toxicity]
Ifyoungpeopledon’tvoteinlargeenoughnumbers,fromapoliticalperspective,theirconcernsaremoot. 0.0186
[Ground-TruthInterpretations] [Toxic- [GeneratedInterpretations] [Toxic- [GeneratedInterpretations] [Toxicity]
ity] ity]
[One2M-Sim-T5] [ChatGPT]
Ifyoungpeoplearereallyworried, 0.0162 Fromapoliticalperspective, 0.0171 Theauthoremphasizesthat 0.0083
theyshouldvotetochangethe youngpeople’sconcernsaremoot withoutstrongvoterturnoutfrom
situation. iftheydon’tvoteinlargeenough youngpeople,theirpolitical
numbers. concernslosesignificance,
underscoringthevaluetheyplace
onactiveandresponsible
participationinthedemocratic
process.
Ifyoungpeoplewantedtobe 0.0240 Youngpeoplearenotworthyof 0.1912 Theauthorarguesthatifyoung 0.0150
representedtheywouldvote. politicalrepresentationunlessthey peoplefailtovoteinsignificant
doso. numbers,theirpoliticalconcerns
becomeirrelevant,highlighting
thebeliefthatthecurrentlackof
ambitionandengagementamong
youngpeopleunderminestheir
claimtopoliticalrepresentation.
Ifmostyoungvotersdontbotherto 0.0247 Thewriterclaimsthatyoung 0.4274 Theauthordismissesthepolitical 0.1148
casttheirvotesthentheirconcens votersdonotdeserveordeserve concernsofyoungpeoplewho
willnotreallybeimportantto anyformofrepresentationbecause don’tvoteinlargenumbers,
politiciansandelectedleaders. theyareineptandlackthe reflectingadisdainfulviewthat
confidencetovote. theirvanityandlackofgenuine
prideincivicdutymaketheir
issuesunworthyofattention.
[Sentence] [Insult]
ButtheDemocrats? 0.0091
[Ground-TruthInterpretations] [Insult] [GeneratedInterpretations] [Insult] [GeneratedInterpretations] [Insult]
[One2M-Sim-T5] [ChatGPT]
TheDemocrats,though? 0.0094 Democrats? 0.0102 Theauthorisquestioningthe 0.1039
Democrats’actionsorpositions,
reflectingacriticalperspectiveon
theirperceivedlackofthoughtful
considerationandconfidence.
Whataboutthedemocrats? 0.0089 ThewriteraskswhyIshouldvote 0.0086 Theauthor’squestion“Butthe 0.0935
inthiscomingelectioncycle. Democrats?”impliesadismissive
attitudetowardtheparty,
suggestingtheyviewitaslacking
inthoughtfulconsiderationand
thusunworthyofattentionor
support.
Thewriterappearstoaskwhether 0.0117 Theauthorwondersifthe 0.3680 Theauthor’squestion“Butthe 0.1235
thedemocratsareabetter Democratsareincompetent. Democrats?”indicatesadismissive
alternativetorepublicansinan viewoftheparty’seffectiveness,
upcomingelection. suggestingthattheauthorbelieves
theirperceivedincompetence
underminestheirvalueand
relevanceintheelection.
(continuedonnextpage)
with a multitude of plausible interpretations. This is evidenced when rigorously analyzing the multiple ground-truth annotations for
sentence interpretation and implicit moral judgments in the curated dataset. Secondly, it does not merely take the implicit content as
the primary subject of prediction but instead lets the different layers of implicit meanings guide the automated generation of sentence
interpretations.
Social grounding and moral reasoning Several studies explored the role of social commonsense and moral reasoning in natural language
processing [66,72,33]. Kim et al. [39], for instance, distilled and contextualized dialogues by leveraging relations related to social
commonsense from a symbolic knowledge graph. Vijayaraghavan and Roy [79]modeled, tracked, and explained changes in emotional
states and motives of people in personal narratives. A few studies specifically focused on automated moral reasoning. Some adopted
a question-answering setup where a model had to select a morally appropriate answer from a given list [31,92]. Hendrycks et al.
[30]and Jin et al. [38]both assessed pre-trained language models in their knowledge of ethics, common human values, and norms
of social conduct by having them classify, respectively, the character trait described in a given scenario using a given list and the
permissibility of violating a pre-existing social norm in a given scenario. Others took a generative, rather normative approach and
provided answers to moral dilemmas [8], judged the morality of a given scenario of social conduct [20,19], or classified explicit
19

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Table7(continued)
[Sentence] [Identity
Attack]
Thatpersonusuallyendsupdoingthingstheydidnotwanttodoandhaveaunfulfillinglife. 0.0038
[Ground-TruthInterpretations] [Identity [GeneratedInterpretations] [Identity [GeneratedInterpretations] [Identity
Attack] Attack] Attack]
[One2M-Sim-T5] [ChatGPT]
Unfortunately,weareforcedtodo 0.0042 Usually,thatpersonendsupdoing 0.0034 Theauthorsuggeststhata 0.0097
thingswedon’tlikeandendup thingstheydidn’twanttodoand resignedpersonoftenendsup
unhappy. haveaunfulfillinglife. livinganunfulfillinglifeby
conformingtoothers’expectations
ratherthanpursuingtheirown
desires,highlightingaconcernfor
theimpactofresignationon
personalfulfillment.
Thatpersonconventionallyends 0.0035 Thewriterdescribespeoplewho 0.0142 Theauthorhighlightsthatan 0.0793
updoingthingstheydidnotoptate dothingsthattheydidnotintend unwiseperson,wholacksambition
todoandhaveaunfulfillinglife. toandwhohaveanunhappylife andhonor,oftenendsupleading
asbeingfoolish. anunfulfillinglifebyconforming
toothers’expectationsratherthan
pursuingtheirowntruedesires,
underscoringtheimportanceof
personalambitionandintegrity.
Peopleoftenfindthemselves 0.0028 Peoplewhoarestupidtendtobe 0.1445 Theauthor’sviewthatthose 0.0352
feelingunfulfilledinlifewhen lazyandenduplivingmediocre lackingambitionoftenendup
theiractionsdon’tconsistently lives. unfulfilledsuggestsanegative
alignwiththeircorevalues,those bias,asitfailstoconsiderthe
idealsthatmatterthemosttoyou. diversereasonsbehindpeople’s
choicesanddismissestheir
challengesandcircumstances.
moral judgments in comments on Reddit [9,17]. More recently, Pyatkin et al. [62]acknowledged that context influences the moral
acceptability of social conduct and classified a given action differently by generating questions regarding the action’s left-out context,
e.g., when did the action take place and who performed the action.
This work is inspired by Talat et al. [74], who argued against a normative moral reasoning approach in which computational
systems explicitly judge the morality of described situations and actions. Taking a descriptive approach, we refrain from evaluating
moral behavior. We instead let computational models implicitly reason over hidden moral judgments as inferred by different readers
to formulate various interpretations of a single sentence. The moral judgments serve as a means for grounding the sentence in society.
All moral judgments inferred by the annotators in the dataset are kept as is; we do not average over them or center on a specific
judgment. Moreover, the models are not requested to pass any judgment on the permissibility of the inferred moral judgments.
Another main aspect in which this work distinguishes itself from previous work investigating moral reasoning is the data. While such
studies generally rely on data that explicitly describe moral scenarios, the origamIMdataset features opinions on a variety of
topics discussing much more than just the morality of behavior. This again underscores the novelty of the curated dataset.
Modeling reader reactions An utterance can spark different reactions. Chatbots, for instance, consistently need to decide how they
react to input from its user, such that the user is satisfied with the chatbot’s responses [81,84,41]. Others predicted the reactions
readers may have to given content. Gao et al. [23], for instance, focused on emotional responses to multimodal news on gun violence.
Deng et al. [13] presented a benchmark for evaluating language models’ ability to predict readers’ emotional reactions to image
and caption pairs. In the field of computational humor, Yang et al. [86] modeled the humor perception of jokes among readers.
Finally, anticipated reader reactions can also be informative for task prediction. For example, Gabriel et al. [22] detected online
misinformation by reasoning over a reader’s emotional and observational responses to headlines and claims.
It is crucial to acknowledge that language affects people differently and that their reactions do not necessarily align with those
anticipated by the author. In the case of IM, a reader’s interpretation is a kind of hidden reaction to a sentence, which in its turn can
trigger subsequent reactions, for instance, a change in opinion or an action. Aside from the interpretations by the readers, the
origamIMdataset also contains explicit indications of reader attitudes towards the author of the sentence. An attitude reflects the
first impression a reader has about the author when reading the sentence and can steer the interpretation process. The IM frameworks
therefore take those explicit reactions together with the inferred moral judgments to model sentence interpretations.
Multiple ground-truth readings IM is strongly motivated by the assumption that there exists genuine human variation in understanding
language and that possibly disagreeing understandings should be respected [61]. Pavlick and Kwiatkowski [60]and Nie et al. [56]
analyzed persistently disagreeing human judgments on the validity of natural language inferences and argued that models should
be evaluated on their ability to predict the wide array of human judgments. Cabitza et al. [10]advocated a perspectivist approach
towards ground-truth annotations and the preservation of diverging annotations. Chen et al. [11]extracted perspectives towards a
claim on a controversial topic, and Draws et al. [15]and Draws et al. [16]evaluated the diversity of presented viewpoints.
20

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
While the latter perspectives commonly present reader positions towards a certain topic (i.e., what does the reader think), inter-
pretations generated through IM reflect what multiple readers think the author of a sentence is actually communicating (i.e., what
does the reader think the author is thinking). As a result, the moral judgments inferred by a reader do not necessarily align with
the reader’s own judgments or with the actual beliefs held by the author. It thus presents a deeper account of the communicative
intentions driving a sentence, substantially differing from what some of the abovementioned works did.
Interpretation modeling versus diverse paraphrase generation At first sight IM arguably resembles paraphrase generation [26,91]. Yet,
both modeling tasks differ on various aspects. First of all, IM aims at modeling the implicit content and explicit content in tandem
rather than focusing on preserving the semantics of the explicit content, as done in paraphrasing. Moreover, the interpretation
of implicit meanings may diverge from the explicit semantics of a sentence while the semantics of the input sentence should be
maintained in a paraphrase. Even to the extent that the interpretation seems to contradict the original sentence. That contraction
would be penalized in paraphrase detection [63,87]. Overall, we can state that IM aims to formulate sentence understandings from a
reader’s perspective while paraphrasing focuses on producing rewrites from the author’s perspective. Regarding diverse generation,
it is of crucial importance that IM models, like many other models tasked with text generation, are able to generate diverse sequences
[75]. We can influence the decoding of such models through several diversity penalties [36], yet the diversity in interpretation also
originates from the diversity in implicit semantics of the input sentence.
10. Conclusion
We started from the premises that natural language understanding (NLU) inevitably has to deal with content left implicit and that
grounding language in its social context is a necessary condition to make implicit content explicit. We introduced the interpretation
modeling (IM) task which aims at capturing the implicit and explicit meaning of a sentence as understood by different readers. IM
is guided by multiple annotations of social relation and common ground - in this work approximated by reader attitudes towards
the author and their understanding of moral judgments subtly embedded in the sentence. We proposed a number of strategies to
decode a sentence into multiple interpretations in the form of natural language text. The one-to-one and one-to-many interpretation
generation methods that we proposed are inspired by the philosophical study of interpretation. As a first of its kind, an IM dataset
is curated to support experiments and analyses. The modeling results, coupled with elaborate analysis of the dataset, underline
the challenges of IM as conflicting and complex interpretations are socially plausible. This interplay of diverse readings is affirmed
by an intrinsic quantitative and qualitative analysis of the results as well as by an in-depth human evaluation of the generated
sentence interpretations. Our work has value in revealing implicit meaning that could be inferred by readers and as such helps
content filtering and moderation. This value was extrinsically demonstrated with toxicity classification of the original sentences and
of original sentences and their possible interpretations, where we have shown that the availability of possible interpretations increased
the recognition of harmful content. The toxicity analyses of the generated interpretations underline the importance of IM for refining
filters of content and assisting content moderators in safeguarding the safety in online discourse.
Finally, if the generative models proposed in this paper can better produce and recognize harmful or dishonest interpretations of
an original, at first sight harmless sentence, similar models might also better prevent harmful content when automatically generating
text. For instance, the interpretation generation models can guide current language models, including ChatGPT, to satisfy one of their
main goals of generating safe and diverse outputs. In a broader set-up, IM can find its place in NLP toolkits that aid corporate and public
communication. For instance, IM can assist professional communicators in predicting and consequently preventing misunderstandings
of their texts. IM could also advise users on their phrasing of texts and make them aware of views they perhaps unconsciously hold
and/or convey, when it is included in general-purpose writing assistants.
There remains a wide array of open challenges that can be researched in the future. Although the proposed generation frameworks
were able to generate diverse interpretation sets, human evaluation indicated that they may not fully grasp the ambiguous nature
of a sentence yet. In future work, we may rely on larger language models and the supervision of a larger and more diverse sample
of annotators may be necessary for surfacing the ‘true’ ambiguity of a sentence. We will investigate ways to integrate commonsense
reasoning, more complex social relations between authors and readers, or other contextual information such as temporal context or
demographic factors [50]that guide interpretation. In this work, we focused on modeling interpretations of isolated sentences and
guided generation using the semantic relatedness between sentence and interpretation. Natural follow-ups would include expansions
of the proposed methods to deal with the larger context surrounding the sentences (e.g., the full blog posts and comments to the
post) and rely on alternative control mechanisms for interpretation generation. Further increasing the size of the OrigamIM dataset
would also allow for investigations into joint predictions of social grounding and interpretations. From a social perspective, our work
could lead to automated generation of interpretations while zooming in on specific societies. Comparative studies could investigate
the plausibility of interpretations in different societies, while detailed studies constraining interpretations on various actors within
a society may present insights in the diversity of views held in that specific society. Since the dataset constructed in this work only
includes data from a specific Subreddit discussing an abundance of topics, follow-up datasets can look into other platforms and
specific topics.
Limitations The annotated moral judgments and interpretations should by no means be considered a complete, socially diverse and
fair account of views that is representative for an entire society. It is virtually impossible to gather all possible interpretations from all
types of people and cultures, making datasets for IM unavoidably incomplete. Regarding annotator selection, we opted not to select
annotators based on demographic features such as age, gender, education level, and political viewpoints since each sentence is only
21

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
annotated by a small number of annotators. This way, we wanted to avoid an overgeneralization of the views of one annotator and
regard it as representative of people with similar demographic features. This study should therefore be seen as a stepping stone for
better understanding the wide diversity of social evaluations and interpretations, for which a much larger sample of readers should
be recruited. The artificial nature of the annotation setting also influences interpretation since crucial contextual knowledge is lost,
e.g., author is unknown to the annotator and previous/following elaboration is omitted. Nonetheless, the setting mimics a real-life
online environment where authors are often unknown and content is taken out of context. Regarding topic biases, interpretations of
sentences touching on emerging topics may be subject to the time at which they are annotated. Validation on samples taken from
other platforms would also be necessary to ensure the robustness of the proposed methods to distribution shifts in the data. Lastly,
we constrained ourselves to leveraging implicit moral judgments during modeling, even though interpretation can be guided by a
wide array of hidden meanings.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Liesbeth Allein:Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Software,
Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.MariaMihaela Truşcaˇ:Formal analysis, Investigation,
Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.Marie-Francine Moens:Conceptualization, Funding
acquisition, Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Supervision, Writing – review & editing.
Ethics statement
We follow the recommendations in Pater et al. [59]for reporting annotator selection, compensation, and communication. Regard-
ing selection, workers were allowed to work on our annotation task immediately after passing an initial annotation instruction test,
which was automatically corrected. They were paid a fixed amount per accepted HIT through the Amazon MTurk platform within
three working days after completion and could earn between the U.S. legal minimum wage of $7.5 and $15/hour depending on their
annotation flow and experience with the task. In case we rejected a HIT, we provided instructive motivations and gave additional
feedback upon request. The majority of rejections originated from incorrect following of explicit instructions. We personally replied
to all messages from the workers, most of them within one working day. We did not discriminate between the annotators in terms of
gender, race, religion, or any other demographic feature.
The sentences were extracted from Reddit posts which had been knowingly published and discussed in a public subreddit. The
sentences should be treated with caution as they were taken out of context and, as a result, may express views unintended by their
authors. The interpretations and moral judgments annotated during dataset construction should in no way be seen as the actual
judgments and views held and intentionally communicated by the authors of the sentences. Nor should they be considered judgments
held by the annotators or the authors of this paper. Due to the limited number of annotators, the annotated collection of judgments
and interpretations accompanying a sentence is not an exhaustive and fair reflection of those existing in society. It may therefore lack
important nuances.
Revealing disputed meanings, negative moral judgments, and underlying toxicity can lead to potential harms. For example, it
may reinforce existing divisions and social stigmatization of vulnerable groups. Nonetheless, access to such information is essential
for NLU systems tasked with content moderation, hate speech detection, and related tasks. Moreover, disputed meanings often arise
from complex issues which cannot be simply reduced to a single perspective. By revealing disputed and harmful content through
interpretation modeling, we allow for a more socially comprehensive understanding of messages and prompt readers to think critically
about the messages they receive.
Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process
During the preparation of this work the authors used ChatGPT in order to rephrase some sentences. After using this tool/service,
the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the content of the publication.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing in-
terests: Liesbeth Allein reports financial support was provided by European Research Council, Research Foundation -Flanders (FWO)
and European Commission Joint Research Centre. Liesbeth Allein reports article publishing charges was provided by European Re-
search Council and Research Foundation -Flanders (FWO). Maria Mihaela Trusca reports financial support was provided by European
Research Council. Marie-Francine Moens reports financial support was provided by European Research Council. If there are other
authors, they declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This work is funded by the European Research Council (ERC) under the Horizon 2020 Advanced Grant CALCULUS No. 788506
and the Research Foundation -Flanders (FWO) under grant G0L0822N through the CHIST-ERA iTRUST project. It was also realized
22

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
in part with the collaboration of the European Commission Joint Research Centre under the Collaborative Doctoral Partnership
Agreement No 35332. The scientific output expressed does not imply a policy position of the European Commission. The authors,
the European Commission, or any person acting on behalf of the Commission are not responsible for the use which might be made of
this publication. We kindly thank Florian Mai and Jingyuan Sun for their insightful feedback on the manuscript.
AppendixA
An overview of the annotation procedure is given in §A.1, followed by a detailed description of the first (§A.2) and second (§A.3)
annotation round.
A.1. Annotation guidelines: procedure
The annotation procedure is split in two rounds.
For a givensentenceand the title of the post the sentence was taken from (= extra context):
Annotation round 1(§A.2)
1. Mark the people and groups of people mentioned in the sentence (highlight people entities in sentence);
2. Indicate whether or not the author implies a character trait for at least one of the marked entities (radio button, yes/no);
Only sentences for which the annotators answered ‘yes’ for step 2 are sent to annotation round 2.
Annotation round 2(§A.3)
1. Indicate your attitude as a reader towards the writer (slider, five-point Likert scale);
2. Reformulate the sentence such that it reflects what the writer ‘basically says’ (free text);
For each entity marked during step 1.1 of ROUND 1:
1. Indicate whether or not the author implies a character trait of the given entity (dropdown list, yes/no).
If yes, continue with (a), (b), and (c). If no, submit annotation.
(a) Describe the implied character trait (free text);
(b) Label whether societyregards the trait as good or bad (dropdown menu, Good/Bad);
(c) Label the Sphere of Action the character trait belongs to (dropdown menu, 10 class labels) and label the degree of appropri-
ateness the character trait belongs to (dropdown menu, 3 class labels).
A.2. Annotation guidelines: round 1
In the first annotation round, annotators need to identify the people entities mentioned in the sentences by highlighting them in
the sentence and then indicate whether or not the author of the sentence seems to imply a character trait of at least one people entity
marked in the sentence. It is made clear in the interface of the first annotation round that the annotators need to fulfill two tasks,
marked by (1/2) and (2/2). The annotators are unable to submit the task without answering the second question to avoid incomplete
task forms. Candidate annotators had to pass a qualification test to have access to the annotation round.
A.2.1. Task 1: mark people entities in a sentence
The annotators mark the people and groups of people mentioned in the sentence (Fig.8). If there are no entities to label, they can
tick the ‘No entities to label’ box at the bottom right of the interface and submit the task form. The title of the post from which the
sentence was taken is given below the sentence to contextualize its content. The general rules for marking people entities are given
below the sentence and title such that the annotators were reminded of them when performing the task. We provide a more in-depth
discussion of the rules with illustrative examples under the instructions tab at the top left corner of the interface (Figs.9and 10).
A.2.1.1. Instructions: what to mark
• Mark words and phrases that refer to aperson or a group of peopleOnly mark words that refer to people or a group of
people such as an organization. Examples:
– Theywelcome refugeesfromtheUkraine.
– I saw this comment from somepeopleintheUS.
– Hetalked about hisfriendChad.
– I’ve liked threedifferentguysthatweretheolderbrother.
– I have friendswhoareTrumpsupporters.
23

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Fig.8.Annotationinterfaceforannotationround1.Annotatorsperformtwotasks:Marktheentitiesinthegivensentence(${sentence}$)usingthelabelprovided
ontheright(People,greenlabel)andindicatewhethertheauthorofthesentenceimpliesacharactertraitofatleastoneofthemarkedentities.Thetitleofthepost
(${title}$)fromwhichthesentencewastakenisgivenascontextsurroundingthesentence.
– Pastconservativeswould not have worried about this.
– NATOshould be taking more responsibility.
• Mark only one reference per person/group in each sentenceIf there is more than one instance that refers to the same person
or group, mark the most descriptive reference or, in case they are identical, the first one.
– Cheerleaderslike to dance and they love to cheer.(both ‘cheerleaders’ and ‘they’ refer to the same group -mark the most descriptive
instance).
– Theylike to dance but they hate to sing.(both instances of ‘they’ refer to the same group -mark the first instance).
• Mark the most descriptive referenceto a person or groupIn case the same entity is referred to more than once in the sentence,
mark the reference that is most descriptive. Example:
– Cheerleaderslike to dance and they love to cheer.(Mark ‘cheerleaders’ as it is more descriptive than ‘they’)
• Do not mark animals or objectsExample:
– Our dog Ziggy is one year old.(‘Our dog Ziggy’ is not a person).
• Do not mark the author (‘I’)Example:
– I saw this comment from somepeopleintheUS.(‘I’ refers to the narrator)
• Do not mark void, vague, or too general referencesExamples:
– Void ‘you’/‘we’. Example: If you would compare the two objects.(‘you’ does not refer to a specific person; void); Yet, we are seeing
mask mandates pop up around the country.(‘we’ does not refer to a specific group; void).
– Vague. Example: I don’t mean to say that certain people with particular sibling orders have less empathy, but I’ve noticed some key
differences in romantic relationships.(‘certain people with particular sibling orders’ is too vague); For me to treat someone as fully
human, ...(‘someone’ is too vague)
– Too general. Example: People say that it will be better.(‘people’ does not refer to a specific group of people).
• Do not mark predicatesPredicates are often preceded by verbs such as ‘to be’. Example:
– Twooftheseguysare the types of dudes that hook up with girls.(‘the types of dudes that hook up with girls’ is predicate to ‘two
of these guys’)
• Do not mark references to a person/group that are part of phrase referring to other people/groupsExample:
– I have friendswhoareTrumpsupporters(‘Trump’ is part of another reference, namely ‘friends who are Trump supporters’)
– JoeBiden’stopcovidadvisorwas on CNN today.(‘Joe Biden’ is part of ‘Joe Biden’s top covid advisor’)
24

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Fig.9.Theinstructionsformarkingthepeopleentitiesinthegivensentencecanbeopenedwhenclickingontheinstructionstabatthetopleft.Theygiveafewshort
examplesentencesandlistwhichreferencesshouldnotbehighlighted.Additionalinformationaboutwhichreferencestohighlightandhowmuchofthereference
needstobehighlightedcanbeaccessedbyclickingontheclickablebluesentencesintheinstructions.
A.2.1.2. Instructions: how much to mark
• Mark all the words that specify the person referred toExample:
– Theywelcome refugeesfromtheUkraine.(marking only ‘refugees’ would be incomplete as it then refers to a larger, more general
group).
– I saw this comment from somepeopleintheUS.(including ‘some’ and ‘in the US’ is more specific than leaving one of the two, or
both, out).
– Hetalked about hisfriendChad.(including ‘his friend’ provides more information on the relation between ‘he’ and ‘Chad’).
– I’ve liked threedifferentguysthatweretheolderbrother.(including the relative clause ‘that were the older brother’ specifies the
identity of the guys).
– I have friendswhoareTrumpsupporters.(including the relative clause ‘who are Trump supporters’ specifies the identity of the
writer’s friends).
– Pastconservativeswould not have worried about this.(including adjective ‘past’ is necessary to refer to the right group of conser-
vatives).
• Except
– Adjectives preceding the person/group noun that denote their personality/character traits; they can be removed without
changing the person or group they refer to.
* Very wise tradesmen or dumb trustfundbabies that somehow make their way through uni. (‘very wise’ and ‘dumb’ describe
character traits).
* Although I’m sure that there are peoplewhonevergotouniversitythat are far smarter than I am, on the whole it would be far more
effective for only reasonable intelligent and conscientious people(people ⇒people who went to university) to decide on the future
of oursociety.(‘reasonable intelligent and conscientious’ describe character traits).
– Relative clauses that do not specify the kind of person/group is referred to; leaving them out would not change the reference.
* There are someonlinepseudo-“leftists”like JimmyDorewho willingly spread propaganda.(‘who willingly spread propaganda’
does not specify the reference.)
A.2.2. Task 2: indicate presence or absence of implied character trait
After labeling the entities in the sentence, the annotators now indicate whether or not the author of the sentence seems to imply
a character trait of at least one entity they have marked in the sentence.
25

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Fig.10.Thepop-upinstructionwhenclickingontheclickablebluelinksprovidedintheinstructions.
A.2.2.1. Instructions: definition of character trait We provide the annotators with a definition of character trait in the instructions,
which can be accessed by clicking on the instructions tab on the top left corner (Fig.11).
A character trait describes an aspect of a person’sbehaviororattitude. The set of character traits then forms someone’s personal-
ity. A trait is alsovoluntaryso it is not forced on that person by someone or something. A person has control over his/her character
traits. A person’s character traits cause him/her to act a certain way. Character traits can very often be described using descriptive
adjectives such as honest, sincere, brave, loyal, vain, timid, and calm. Examples:
• Eric disguises himself.(Eric is sneaky).
• Eric likes to talk about himself.(Eric is vain).
• Eric does not want to spend much money.(Eric is stingy).
A.2.2.2. Instructions: the author implies trait of at least one entity The annotators should ask themselves whether the author seems to
suggest something about the character of the people in the sentence. It is important to distinguish between character traits implied
26

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Fig.11.InstructionsregardingTask2(a)anddefinitionofcharactertrait(b).
by the author, showing that the author seems to hold certain beliefs about people, and character traits that a reader or other people
mentioned by the writer belief people have (a reader or mentioned person holds certain beliefs about people). Like any other person,
an annotator can have certain, pre-existing beliefs about (groups of) people or can be aware of pre-existing beliefs that others have
about them. We therefore stress in the phrasing of the second task that the annotators should think about what the author seems to
imply by underlining theauthor: “Does theauthorseem to imply a character trait of atleastone‘People’-labeled person/group?”. We also
underline atleastoneto stress that a character trait for all entities need to be implied for indicating ‘yes’.
A.2.3. Qualification test: round 1
Candidate annotators first have to pass a qualification test before they can start the annotation round. They were automatically
admitted to the annotation round if they answered all questions in the qualification test correctly. The qualification test instructs the
annotators on how to adequately mark people entities in a sentence by going over five main rules. For each rule, the annotator is
presented with an example sentence. They then need to pick the correct labeling answer from the options below the sentence (radio
button). We indicate the correct answer with(X).
Test description: We go over FIVE labeling rules for this task. For each rule, you will be presented with an example sentence and you need to
pick the correct labeling answer from the options below. If you pick all the correct answers, you can automatically start the labeling task.
• Rule 1: Highlight all words, phrases, or sections of the sentence that refer to people other than the author (i.e., ‘I’).
– Sentence: “I talked with my friend Chad about some men from Texas and people who like Star Wars.”
* I -Chad -men -people
* (X)my friend Chad -some men from Texas -people who like Star Wars
• Rule 2: Highlight only one reference per person/group + choose most descriptive reference.
– Sentence: “Cheerleaders like to dance and they love to cheer.”
* (X)Cheerleaders
* Cheerleaders -they
* they
27

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
• Rule 3: Highlight all words specifying the reference; except adjectives indicating personality (e.g., reasonable, vain).
– Sentence: “The blond girl from Canada told that there are honest girls and generous boys in her class.”
* girl -girls -boys
* The blond girl from Canada -honest girls -generous boys
* (X)The blond girl from Canada -girls -boys
• Rule 4: Do not highlight vague, void and too general references.
– Sentence: “If you meet someone online, people will tell you to be cautious”
* you -someone -people
* (X)[None] (you = void, someone = vague, people = too general)
• Rule 5: Do not highlight predicates (often after a modal verb like ‘to be’: ‘Person is [predicate]’) and people that are part of
another, larger reference
– Sentence: “Barack Obama became the US president when he was 48 and Barack Obama’s wife was the First Lady”
* (X)Barack Obama -Barack Obama’s wife
* Barack Obama -the US president -wife -the First Lady
A.3. Annotation guidelines: round 2
The annotators start by reading the sentence (${sentence}) and the post from which the sentence is taken (${title}). They are
then asked to describe their attitude towards the author and formulate their interpretation of the given sentence. Going over all
people identified in the sentence, they indicate for each entity whether or not the author of the sentence implies a character trait
of that entity. For all entities with an implied character trait, the annotators also describe the trait, label the evaluation of that trait
in society, and classify it in Virtue Ethics by labeling the Sphere of Action the trait belongs to and its contextual appropriateness.
It is made clear in the interface (Fig.12) that the annotators need to fulfill four tasks, marked by (1/4) to (4/4). They can access
the instructions with illustrative examples at any time during annotation by clicking on the instructions tab at the top left corner of
the interface (Fig.13). The instructions then appear on the left and can stay visible during the annotation process. They disappear
when clicking on the instructions tab again. The annotators are unable to submit the task form without providing an interpretation,
which is the most important part of this annotation round. Candidate annotators had to pass a qualification test to have access to the
annotation round.
A.3.1. Task 1: describe attitude towards author of sentence
The annotators describe their attitude towards the author of the sentence upon reading the sentence. We stress in the task descrip-
tion that they should describe their own attitude by underlining yourattitudein the task description and state in brackets that their
attitude is their impression of the author based on the sentence. They change the slider given below the task description and set it to
the best-fitting attitude on a five-point Likert scale ranging from very negativetot very positive. When moving the slider, the value to
which they set it changes to blue and depicts the number referring to the attitude they set it to (Fig.14).
A.3.1.1. Instructions: definitions of attitude scale We provide the annotators with a definition of each attitude type in the instructions.
They can access the overview of attitude definitions by clicking on the clickable blue sentence “What do the attitude mean?” in the
instructions. The overview then appears as a pop-up screen (Fig.15).
• Very negativeAfter reading the sentence, the annotator has a very negative view of the author. They completely disagree with
what the author said. They would never say or think the same, or never phrase it like the author did.
• NegativeAfter reading the sentence, the annotator has a negative view of the author. They disagree with what the author said.
They would not say or think the same, or phrase it like the author did.
• NeutralAfter reading the sentence, the annotator does not have a negative of positive view of the author. They do not agree of
disagree with what the author said.
• PositiveAfter reading the sentence, the annotator has a positive view of the author. They agree with what the author said. They
would say or think the same, or phrase it like the author did.
• Very positiveAfter reading the sentence, the annotator has a very positive view of the author. They completely agree with what
the author said. They would definitely say or think the same, or phrase it like the author did.
A.3.2. Task 2: formulate interpretation of sentence
The annotators write their interpretation of the given sentence in their own words. We stress that they should formulate their
own interpretation by underlining yourinterpretationin the task description. They are also explicitly asked to not simply copy the
sentence. The instructions additionally state that your interpretation may reveal implicit information contained within the sentence.
A.3.2.1. Instructions: examples of interpretations We provide the annotators with several examples of possible interpretations for
an example sentence, which can be accessed by clicking on the clickable blue phrase “Examples interpretations” in the instructions
(Fig.16). The examples appear in a pop-up screen. We phrase the interpretations in such a way so that the underlying messages and
hidden moral judgments surface.
Given sentence: “They need to force the unemployed to look for work.”
28

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Fig.12.ThemainannotationinterfaceofANNOTATIONROUND2.
• Possible interpretation (1): “As the unemployed are too lazy to look for a job, we need to force them to do this.”
• Possible interpretation (2): “They, who are superior, need to force the unemployed to look for work.”
• Possible interpretation (3): “They need to force the unemployed to look for work, because they are superior to them and the unemployed
are too lazy to do it themselves.”
29

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Fig.13.Overviewoftheinstructionsthatappearwhenclickingontheinstructionstabatthetopleftoftheannotationinterface.
30

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Fig.14.AttitudeslidershowsattitudevaluesonafivepointLikertscale.
Fig.15.Overviewofthedifferentattitudetypesandtheirdescriptiongivenintheinstructions.
Fig.16.Examplesofpossibleinterpretationsofagivensentencegivenintheinstructions.
A.3.3. Task 3: categorize implied character trait for each entity in sentence
The annotators need to answer the following questions for each entity that was previously marked in the first annotation round:
• Does the author seem to imply a character trait of this entity? (Task 3.1)
• If Task 3.1 = yes:
– What is the character trait? (Task 3.2)
– How does society evaluate this character trait? (Task 3.3)
– Where is the character positioned in Virtue Ethics in terms of Sphere of Action and contextual appropriateness? (Task 3.4)
31

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Fig.17.InterfacefortacklingTask3.
Fig.18.Drop-downlistforsolvingTask3.1.
The interface presents the classification table for classifying the character traits in Virtue Ethics right below the task description
(Fig. 17a). The annotators are then given the list of people entities for which they need to provide annotations (${people}). The
interface then contains entity annotation blocks, with the number of blocks equal to the number of entities in the people entities list
(Fig.17b). Each block first presents the sentence such that the annotator does not need to scroll up to read the sentence again. The
block then contains Task 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, and 3.4. The tasks are framed as sentences, and the annotators need to select the labels from
drop-down lists.
A.3.3.1. Task 3.1: indicate presence implied character trait of entity The annotators need to indicate whether or not the author implies
a character trait of the given people entity. They do this by choosing between yes and nofrom a drop-down list (Fig.18). If they
indicate yes, they need to continue with the annotation for this entity. This is also stated in bold after the drop-down list. Otherwise,
they can continue to annotate the next entity or, in case this entity is the last one, submit the task form.
32

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Fig.19.InputforTask3.2.isprovidedasfreetext.
Fig.20.Drop-downlistforsolvingTask3.3.
Instructions: definition of character trait The annotators are given the same definition of character trait given in the first annotation
round, see § A.2.2.1. The definition can be accessed by clicking on the clickable blue sentence “What is a character trait?” in the
instructions, which then appears in a pop-up screen.
A.3.3.2. Task 3.2: identify implied character trait of entity The annotators describe the implied character trait in their own words in
the free-text text box (Fig.19).
Instructions: how to describe trait The annotators are encouraged to describe the trait using an adjective (“Describe the trait using an
adjective (e.g., honest, vain) here.”) and not to use an adjective that is presented in the Virtue Ethics classification table given above
(“Try using a term that is not in the table able.”), see Fig.19. When the annotators start describing the trait, the two instructions appear
above the free-text box.
A.3.3.3. Task 3.3: evaluate implied character trait of entity in society The annotators decide whether society thinks this is a good
(positive) or bad(negative) trait (Fig.20). Or in other words, does society praise people for having this trait or frown upon or even
reject this trait, respectively.
Instructions: focus on what society thinks Since we are interested in how the character trait is evaluated in society, we mark societyin
bold in the task description (“Society thinks this trait is”). This way, we encourage annotators to think beyond their own evaluations
of character trait and position the trait in the society they are part of.
A.3.3.4. Task 3.4: classify implied character trait of entity in virtue ethics The annotators classify the implied character trait in Virtue
Ethics by selecting the best-fitting labels from the drop-down lists (Fig.21). A table containing all the Virtue Ethics labels is given
below the task description so that the annotators can easily consult the possible labels. They first classify the trait in a Sphere of
Action (table rows) and then by its contextual appropriateness (table columns). When clicking on the instructions tab at the top left
corner, the annotators see an overview of all the Spheres of Action with a brief description for each Sphere of Action (Fig.22).
Before starting the annotation task, candidate annotators had to pass an instruction test in which the Virtue Ethics and its labels
were explained and participants had to select the appropriate contextual appropriateness label for ten sentences, with each sentence
related to a different Sphere of Action. The annotators were allowed to start the annotation task if they correctly labeled nine sentences.
Instructions: virtue ethics We adopt the well-established Aristotelian Ethics [7], more specifically Nichomachean Ethics, to label
people’s moral virtues and vices. Aristotle argued that a virtue/vice is a character trait or a state of someone’s character/personality.
A Virtue of trait causes a person to act in a manner that is appropriate and desired by society in a given context. It is not because
33

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Fig.21.Drop-downlistsforsolvingTask3.4.
someone acts in a Virtue of manner thatperson is actually virtuous. It is important that the action is voluntary and within the control
of the individual. By contrast, a vicious trait causes a person to act in a manner that is frowned upon, disapproved or even forbidden
by society.
Aristotle identified severalSpheres of Action (SoA)that cause people to act in various ways. Those different kinds of actions
are put on an axis according to their degree or contextual appropriateness: deficiency, mean and excess. Aristotle stated that a
Virtue of person acts in a moderate and contextually appropriate manner (= mean), while a morally faulty person resides to morally
deficient (= deficiency) or exceeding actions (= excess). We therefore speak of Vice of Deficiency,Virtue of Mean, andVice of
Excess. Table8presents an overview of the Spheres of Action and the contextual appropriateness labels. We take the descriptions of
the SoAs from Aristotle [7].
Confidence (fear, uncertainty) How someone deals with fearful, uncertain events/situations and to which extent someone is confident
about their actions.
• Cowardice [Vice of Deficiency]Lack of confidence, excess in fear
Someone who has too much fearwhen dealing with uncertain situations when dealing with uncertain situations. This person also
fears the wrong thingsand deals with things in the wrong way. It could be said that this person is deficient in confidencewhen being
faced with situations that excite fear and uncertainty.
• Courage [Virtue of Mean]Appropriate fear and confidence
Someone who fears the right situations and the level of fear depends on the fear-exciting nature of each of those situations (fearful
things differ in importance and thus a courageous person fears it accordingly). This person deals with fear-exciting situations
with appropriatecourage/confidence, in the appropriate way, and at the appropriate time. This person’s courage originates from
a sense of nobility and is not excited under compulsionbecause being courageous is a voluntary trait.
• Rashness [Vice of Excess]Lack of fear, excess in confidence
Someone has too little fearand too much confidencewhen dealing with uncertain situations. This person pretends to have a courage
(s)he has not. The high level of confidence is often caused by a sense of superiority and invincibility.
34

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Fig.22.DefinitionsoftwoSpheresofActionthatappearwhenclickingontheclickablebluephrases1-confidence(fear,uncertainty)(a)and3-giving(andtaking-small
amountsofmoney(b).
Table8
OverviewofSpheresofActions(SoA)withtheirthevirtueandvices.
SoAorfeeling Viceofdeficiency Virtueofmean Viceofexcess
Confidence(fear,uncertainty) cowardice courage rashness
Pleasuresofthebody insensibility temperance profligacy
Giving(andtaking)-small stinginess liberality,generosity prodigality
amountsofmoney
Giving(andtaking)-other, meanness magnificence vulgarity
addedvalue
Pride(honour=cause) little-mindedness high-mindedness vanity
Ambition(honour=goal) lackofambition properambition over-ambitiousness
Anger easy-tempered, gentleness hard-tempered,
spiritlessness wrathfulness
Pleasure(andpain)ofothers cross,contentious agreeableness, flattery
friendliness
Truth,honestyaboutoneself irony truthfulness boastfulness
Amusingconversation boorishness wittiness buffoonery
Pleasures of the body How someone deals with and is able to control and fulfil the needs and pleasures of the body.
• Insensibility [Vice of Deficiency]Too little delight in bodily pleasures
Someone who takes less delight in such pleasures than ought to. This is rather uncommon, almost non-existent as these urges
are innate and attached to our animal nature.
• Temperance [Virtue of Mean]Self-control, appropriate desire to fulfill bodily pleasures
Someone who has temperance and self-control. This person desires moderately, in the appropriate way, at the appropriate time
and at the appropriate place. The absence of these pleasant things or the abstinence from them is not painful to a temperate
person.
• Profligacy [Vice of Excess]Too much delight in bodily pleasures
35

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Someone who is a slave to bodily pleasures and loves these delights/pleasures too much. For example, heavy drinking (drinking
more than is good for you), obesity, and gluttony. This person also enjoys things that (s)he should not enjoy, in the wrong manner,
and more than necessary. The life of a profligate person is led by his/her appetites. Other examples: adultery and outrage.
Example:
– There was oneguywhohadayoungerbrother. He(⇒one guy who had a younger brother), ahem, tried to take advantage of me when
I was drunk.
Giving (and taking) -small amounts of money How and to which someone spends their resources (monetary and non-monetary)
• Stinginess [Vice of Deficiency]Lack of giving, excess in taking
Someone who cares more for wealth than is right, is fond of money. This person takes more than (s)he gives. Examples: greed,
meanness, lending money at high interests. The mean person never does anything without thinking twice and always considers
how things can be done at the least possible cost.
• Liberality, Generosity [Virtue of Mean]Spending resources to create added value for others
Someone who spends their money and other resources on proper things, allocate resources to the right people (generosity),
acquires wealth by taking from the proper sources, and desires to reach goals in the right manner (proper amount spent). The
liberal person invests in public objects and other people to create added value, which is not always valued in money. This person
does go for the cheapest or most expensive way to do things (focus on means), but instead focuses on the goal.
Example:
– However, he has a history of charity that goes far beyond this instance. He invested over one billion in a poor region in Russia,
transforming the local economy and greatly raising the standard of living there.(he)
• Prodigality [Vice of Excess]Excess in giving (lack in taking)
Someone who squanders money in riotous, wasteful living. The wasteful person wastes money on things that do not create added
value to others (improper objects), or spends too much on small objects. This person also likes to display their wealth to others.
Giving (and taking) -other, added value How someone spends their wealth to create added value and to which things (their worth is
not always measurable in terms of money), spending/giving according to their wealth.
• Meanness [Vice of Deficiency]Lack of giving, excess in taking
The mean person likes to do things at the lowest possible cost.
• Magnificence [Virtue of Mean]Spending resources to create added value for others
The magnificent person invests in public objects and other people to create added value, which is not always valued in money.
This person does not go for the cheapest or most expensive way to do things (focus on means), but instead focuses on the goal.
• Prodigality, Wastefulness [Vice of Excess]Excess in giving, lack in taking
Someone who squanders money in riotous, wasteful living. The wasteful person wastes money on things that do not create added
value to others (improper objects), or spends too much on small objects. This person also likes to display their wealth to others.
Pride (honour = cause) How someone communicates about and acts according to one’s honour/pride.
• Little-mindedness [Vice of Deficiency]Lacks pride, false modesty
Someone who claims less than (s)he deserves and deprives him/herself of what (s)he deserves. This should not be confused with
modesty as this person actively deprives himself of honour (false modesty). This person is too retiring.
• High-mindedness [Virtue of Mean]Proper sense and display of honour
Someone who claims much but also deserves much. This differs from modesty as a modest person has little to claim about -
high-mindedness implies some kind of greatness. The high-minded person also does not seek honour from just everyone (does
not look for praise) or on trivial grounds. This person is not easily moved to admiration, does not gossip or speak evil of others.
Brooding on the past or blaming others is not something a high-minded person would do.
• Vanity [Vice of Excess]Excess in pride, loves oneself
Someone who claims much without deserving it. The vain person considers him/herself the better person (sense of superiority)
and believes that (s)he deserves greater things. This sense of superiority is unjust and unjustified. This person is ignorant about
his/her honour, likes to talk about his/herself, looks down on others and speaks evil of others. At a professional level, they tend
to take positions for which they are unfit.
Example:
– There are very low quality psychologistswho go around trying to tell people what to do and fix their problems but they are not qualified
because they have studied a shell major, which is psychology.
Ambition (honour = goal) How someone builds towards more honour, how someone works on becoming a more Virtue of person.
• Lack of ambition [Vice of Deficiency]Lacks ambition
Someone who has little desire to improve one’s character or condition. Example: laziness. This person also tends to blame others
for his/her lack of ambition.
36

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Example:
– Psychologistis just someone who cannot man up and study medicine so they go for the sad mockery (...) People(⇒psychologists)
study it as a wild card/placeholder major.(psychologists)
• Proper ambition [Virtue of Mean]Healthy ambition
Someone who is ambitious in the proper manner, in the proper situations and for reaching appropriate goals.
• Over-ambitiousness [Vice of Excess]Too much ambition
Someone who desires too much -often at the expense of others. For this person, the goal justifies the means.
Anger How someone deals with emotions, especially negative emotions such as anger.
• Easy-tempered, spiritlessness [Vice of Deficiency]Too little anger
Someone who does not sufficiently deal with their negative emotions, quite emotionless. The easy-tempered person also lacks
the spirit to defend him/herself and, more importantly, others.
• Gentleness [Virtue of Mean]Deals with negative emotions such as anger in a proper way.
Someone who is angry on the right occasions, with the right persons, in the right manner, for the right reasons and for the right
length of time. The gentle person does not lose his/her balance and does not get carried away by emotions. This person is ready
to forgive and is not eager to take vengeance.
• Hard-tempered, wrathfulness [Vice of Excess]Too much anger
Someone who is easily angered by anything and anyone on any occasion. This hard-tempered person’s bursts of emotions can be
either very short or very long (vengeance and punishment). This person is also prone to violence, vengeance and punishment.
(S)he does not easily forgive. The extremes are choleric people.
Example:
– I understand Putinis insane.(Putin)
Pleasure (and pain) of others How someone agrees (pleasure of other) or disagrees (pain of other) with his/her interlocutor in any
type of interaction.
• Cross, Contentious [Vice of Deficiency]too much pain of other, disagreement
Someone who objects to and disagrees with everything and anyone. The cross person does not consider the (emotional) pain
they give to people, sets his/her face against everything.
Example:
– “Mymother took some pictures and posted them on Facebook, where they were quickly filled with horrified comments from
variousAmericanswhosheisfriendswith.”(various Americans who she is friends with)
• Agreeableness, friendliness [Virtue of Mean]appropriate mix of agreement and disagreement
Someone who (dis)agrees when she oughts to and not because of love or hate. The agreeable person fits their behaviorto the
context and the person they are talking to.
• Flattery [Vice of Excess]Too much pleasure of other, agreement
Someone who pleases people by praising everything and not objecting to anything. This “people-pleaser” feels the need to avoid
discomfort and maximize the pleasure of others. When this person has a goal that leads to this pleasing, then we call it flattery.
Truth, honesty about oneself How truthful someone is in their interaction with others: what they say and how they say it.
• Irony [Vice of Deficiency]Minimizing truthfulness by disclaiming and depreciating the truth
Someone who disclaims what (s)he has or depreciates it. This depreciatory way of speaking allows him/her to avoid parade. The
character of ironic person should not be confused with modesty and irony (as a figure of speech).
• Truthfulness [Virtue of Mean]truthful in word and deed
Someone who is truthful in word and deed. The truthful person never exaggerates or diminishes the truth, and shuns falsehood
as a base thing (does not take pleasure in it). This person is more inclined towards understatement than overstatement of the
truth.
Example:
– I also understand more thoughtful conservativeswhovotedforTrump, because regardless of their opinions on him(⇒Trump) as a
person, they knew he would support conservative causes, which he did.(Trump)
• Boastfulness [Vice of Excess]Pretension and twisting the truth
Someone who likes to pretend to be someone they are not or pretend to hold ideas that others esteem even though they do not.
Examples: liars and hypocrites.
Example:
– I will make it very clear, I’m not pro Russian or pro Ukraine, I think both sides are to be blamed for this war and mostly we are seeing
only one side of the story from thewesternmedia.(the western media)
Amusing conversation How someone behaves during amusingconversation and mixing with others
37

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
• Boorishness [Vice of Deficiency]Too boring and serious
Someone who never says anything laughable, contributes little to the conversation, is too serious and takes everything in ill part.
• Wittiness [Virtue of Mean]Graceful jest and tact
Someone who has a lot of tact, jests gracefully, does not ridicule anyone.
• Buffoonery [Vice of Excess]Excess in ridicule
Someone who does ridicule things just for a laugh, not elegant in their wit, easily resides to offense. The ridicule person likes to
make jests of people, vilify them or laugh with them.
A.3.4. Qualification test: round 2
Candidate annotators first have to pass a qualification test before they can start the annotation round. They were automatically
admitted to the annotation round if they answered all questions or all but one question in the qualification test correctly. The
qualification test starts by briefly explaining the three contextual appropriateness labels, called behaviortypes in the test for simplicity,
after which the annotators have to select the correct description of the types (radio button). It then goes over all Spheres of Action,
called situations in the test for simplicity. An example sentence and a person of interest is given for each situation and the annotators
are expected to select the best-fitting behaviortype for the person of interest as implied in the sentence (radio button). The sentences
present rather clear examples of the behaviortype. We indicate the correct answer with(X).
Test description: In this project, you will be asked to describe IMPLIED (= indirectly suggested) CHARACTER TRAITS and classify
them given a predefined set of situations and behaviors. We go over the ten different SITUATIONS (= spheres of action), each having three
BEHAVIOR types (‘vice of deficiency’, ‘virtue of mean’, ‘vice of excess’).
(3 BEHAVIOR TYPES) Each situation incites certain behaviors. Those behaviors can either be desired/positive (= virtue) or unde-
sired/negative (= vice).
-A desired behavior (= virtue) is APPROPRIATE to the situation and people involved. It is often a moderate behavior. We therefore
classify this type of desired behavior as ‘VIRTUE OF MEAN’.
-An undesired behavior (= vice) is disproportionate to the situation and people involved. If it is EXCESSIVE, or ‘too much’, we call
this type of undesired behavior as ‘VICE OF EXCESS’. The behavior can also be DEFICIENT, or ‘too little’. We then call this undesired
behavior ‘VICE OF DEFICIENCY’.
• Pick the correct description for the three behavior types: VICE OF DEFICIENCY -VIRTUE OF MEAN -VICE OF EXCESS.
– “too much” -appropriate -“too little”
– (X)“too little” -appropriate -“too much”
(10 SITUATIONS) For each situation (S), we give an example sentence and a person of interest (– Person). You need to pick the
BEST-FITTING behavior type for the person of interest, as IMPLIED in the sentence.
• (S1) CONFIDENCE (FEAR, UNCERTAINTY): how someone deals with fear-inciting, uncertain events and the extent to which
someone is confident about their actions.
– “They made increasingly reckless investments.” – They
* Vice of Deficiency ⇒cowardice, or “too little” confidence (= too much fear/uncertainty)
* Virtue of Mean ⇒courage, or “appropriate” confidence, fear and uncertainty
* (X)Vice of Excess ⇒rashness, or “too much” confidence (= too little fear/uncertainty)
• (S2) PLEASURES OF THE BODY: how someone deals with and is able to control and fulfill needs and pleasures, especially those
of the body.
– “He, ahem, tried to take advantage of me when I was drunk.” – He
* Vice of Deficiency ⇒insensibility, or “too little” delight in bodily pleasures
* Virtue of Mean ⇒temperance, or “appropriate” delight (self-control)
* (X)Vice of Excess ⇒profligacy, or “too much” delight
• (S3) GIVING (AND TAKING) -small amounts of money: how someone spends their wealth on things whose worth are though of
in terms of MONEY.
– “Don’t ask Carla for any money, she would only lend it to you at large interests.” – Carla
* (X)Vice of Deficiency ⇒stinginess, or “too little” giving (= too much taking)
* Virtue of Mean ⇒liberality/generosity, or “appropriate” giving (spending on the appropriate things)
* Vice of Excess ⇒prodigality/wastefulness, or “too much” giving (= too little taking; squandering)
• (S4) GIVING (AND TAKING) -other, added value: how someone spends their wealth to create added value and to which things
(their worth is not always measurable in terms of money), spending/giving according to their wealth.
– “Anna supports the animal shelter in our city financially and volunteers there twice a week.” – Anna
* Vice of Deficiency ⇒meanness, or “too little” giving (little added value)
* (X)Virtue of Mean ⇒magnificence, or “appropriate” giving (creating added value)
* Vice of Excess ⇒vulgarity, or “too much” giving (making great display on the wrong occasions and in the wrong way, little
added value)
38

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
Table9
Recall,Precision,andF1scoreswereusedtoevaluatetheoverlapbetweensentencesflagged
byhumaninterpretationsandthoseflaggedbytheOne2M-Sim-T5model.One2M-Sim-T5can
mimichumanbehaviorbyrecognizinghiddenmeaningsininputsentences(Analysis1A)and,
insomecases,candetecttoxicityandinsultsevenmoreeffectivelythanhumans,asshownby
thehighprecisionscores-doublewhencomparedwiththerecallscores(Analysis1B).
Score Analysis1A Analysis1B
Recall Precision F1 Recall Precision F1
Toxicity 85.29% 86.83% 86.05% 26.23% 57.14% 35.96%
Insult 83.91% 89.02% 86.39% 20.0% 43.75% 27.45%
Identityattack 90.45% 90.45% 90.45% 41.67% 50.0% 45.45%
• (S5) PRIDE (HONOUR = CAUSE): how someone communicates about and acts according to one’s honour/pride. Honour is the
CAUSE of their behavior.
– “There are very low quality psychologists who go around trying to tell people what to do and fix their problems but they are
not qualified.” – psychologists
* Vice of Deficiency ⇒little-mindedness, or “too little” pride (false modesty)
* Virtue of Mean ⇒high-mindedness, or “appropriate” pride
* (X)Vice of Excess ⇒vanity, or “too much” unjustified pride (sense of superiority)
• (S6) AMBITION (HONOUR = GOAL): How someone builds towards more honour and a more virtuous self. Honour is the GOAL
of their behavior.
– “John’s parents had to force him to look for a job.” – him (= John)
* (X)Vice of Deficiency ⇒lack of ambition, or “too little” ambition
* Virtue of Mean ⇒proper ambition, or “appropriate” ambition
* Vice of Excess ⇒over-ambitiousness, or “too much” ambition (toxic)
• (S7) ANGER: How someone deals with emotions, especially negative emotions such as anger.
– “Serena has a list of everyone who has ever wronged her.” – Serena
* Vice of Deficiency ⇒easy-tempered/spiritlessness, or “too little” anger (emotionless, careless)
* Virtue of Mean ⇒gentleness, “appropriate” anger (led by reason, not by emotions)
* (X)Vice of Excess ⇒hard-tempered, or “too much” anger (wrathfulness, irritability)
• (S8) PLEASURE (AND PAIN) OF OTHERS: general pleasantness in life, or how someone agrees (pleasure of other) or disagrees
(pain of other) with his/her interlocutor in any type of interaction.
– “My mother posted some of her poems on Facebook, but they were quickly filled with mean and discouraging comments from
many of her so-called friends.” – many of her so-called friends
* (X)Vice of Deficiency ⇒cross/contentious, or “too little” pleasure/agreement (= too much pain)
* Virtue of Mean ⇒agreeableness/friendliness, or “appropriate” mix of (dis)agreement
* Vice of Excess ⇒flattery, or “too much” agreement (= too little pain; people pleaser, often for own advantage)
• (S9) TRUTH, HONESTY ABOUT ONESELF: How truthful someone is in their interaction with others; what they say and how they
say it.
– “To me, it sounds weird to think that Jeremy is lying.” – Jeremy
* Vice of Deficiency ⇒irony, or “too little” truthfulness by disclaiming/depreciating the truth (pretense as understatement)
* (X)Virtue of Mean ⇒truthfulness, truthful in word and deed
* Vice of Excess ⇒boastfulness, “too much” so-called truth (pretense as exaggeration)
• (S10) AMUSING CONVERSATION: How someone behaves during amusing conversation and mixing with others.
– “Hannah never says anything remotely funny, she’s always standing there with a long face.” – Hannah
* (X)Vice of Deficiency ⇒boorishness, or “too little” amusement (too boring, serious)
* Virtue of Mean ⇒wittiness, “appropriate” amusement
* Vice of Excess ⇒buffoonery, “too much” amusement (ridicule)
A.4. Demographic information on human evaluators
• Gender: female, female
• Age: 22, 23
• Education level: master, master
• Nationality: Belgian, Japanese
A.5. Additional results
In the main paper, we use recall to analyze the overlap between the sentences flagged by the ground-truth interpretations with
those flagged by the One2M-Sim-T5 generated interpretations. A sentence is flagged if at least one of its interpretations has higher
39

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
toxicity, insult, or identity attack scores than the sentence’s original scores. While recall is a key metric for content moderation, Table9
also presents precision and F1 scores. Analysis 1Aconsiders all flagged sentences, whereas Analysis 1Bincludes only sentences flagged
by interpretations whose scores are at least 10 percentage points higher than the original sentence scores.
In the context of Analysis 1A, precision and F1 scores are similar to recall scores, demonstrating that the One2M-Sim-T5 model can
identify sentences with hidden meanings by generating interpretations with toxicity, insult, and identity attack scores higher than the
original sentence scores. The high precision scores, double compared to the recall scores for toxicity and insult (Analysis 1B) suggest
that One2M-Sim-T5 may be even more effective at detecting toxicity and insults in input sentences than humans.
Data availability
The dataset is publicly available: https://github .com /laallein /origamIM.
References
[1]K.AlKhatib,M.Völske,S.Syed,N.Kolyada,B.Stein,Exploitingpersonalcharacteristicsofdebatersforpredictingpersuasiveness,in:D.Jurafsky,J.Chai,
N.Schluter,J.Tetreault(Eds.),Proceedingsofthe58thAnnualMeetingoftheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics,2020,July,pp.7067–7072,Online:
AssociationforComputationalLinguistics.Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.632.
[2]L.Allein,I.Augenstein,M.-F.Moens,Time-awareevidencerankingforfact-checking,J.WebSemant.71(2021)100663.
[3]L.Allein,M.-F.Moens,D.Perrotta,Preventingprofilingforethicalfakenewsdetection,Inf.Process.Manag.60(2)(2023)103206.
[4]L.Allein,M.Saelens,R.Cartuyvels,M.-F.Moens,Implicittemporalreasoningforevidence-basedfact-checking,in:FindingsoftheAssociationforComputational
Linguistics:EACL2023,AssociationforComputationalLinguistics,Dubrovnik,Croatia,2023,May,pp.176–189,Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/2023.
findings-eacl.13.
[5]L.Allein,M.-F.Moens,OrigamIM:adatasetofambiguoussentenceinterpretationsforsocialgroundingandimplicitlanguageunderstanding,in:Proceedings
ofthe3rdWorkshoponPerspectivistApproachestoNLP(NLPerspectives)@LREC-COLING2024,ELRAandICCL,Torino,Italia,2024,May,pp.116–122,
Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/2024.nlperspectives-1.13.
[6]M.Alshomary,R.ElBaff,T.Gurcke,H.Wachsmuth,Themoraldebater:astudyonthecomputationalgenerationofmorallyframedarguments,in:Proceedings
ofthe60thAnnualMeetingoftheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics(Volume1:LongPapers),AssociationforComputationalLinguistics,Dublin,Ireland,
2022,May,pp.8782–8797,Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.601.
[7]Aristotle,Aristotle:nicomacheanethics,in:R.Crisp(Ed.),CambridgeUniversityPress,2000.
[8]Y.Bang,N.Lee,T.Yu,L.Khalatbari,Y.Xu,D.Su,etal.,Aisocrates:towardsansweringethicalquandaryquestions,arXivpreprint,arXiv:2205.05989,2022.
[9]N.Botzer,S.Gu,T.Weninger,AnalysisofmoraljudgmentonReddit,IEEETrans.Comput.Soc.Syst.(2022)1–11,https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSS.2022.3160677.
[10] F.Cabitza,A.Campagner,V.Basile,Towardaperspectivistturningroundtruthingforpredictivecomputing,in:ProceedingsoftheAAAIConferenceonArtificial
Intelligence,2023,pp.6860–6868.
[11] S.Chen,D.Khashabi,W.Yin,C.Callison-Burch,D.Roth,Seeingthingsfromadifferentangle:discoveringdiverseperspectivesaboutclaims,in:Proceedingsof
the2019ConferenceoftheNorthAmericanChapteroftheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics:HumanLanguageTechnologies,Volume1(LongandShort
Papers),AssociationforComputationalLinguistics,Minneapolis,Minnesota,2019,June,pp.542–557,Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/N19-1053.
[12] G.Collell,L.VanGool,M.-F.Moens,Acquiringcommonsensespatialknowledgethroughimplicitspatialtemplates,in:ProceedingsoftheAAAIConferenceon
ArtificialIntelligence,vol.32,2018.
[13] K.Deng,A.Ray,R.Tan,S.Gabriel,B.A.Plummer,K.Saenko,Socratis:arelargemultimodalmodelsemotionallyaware?,arXivpreprint,arXiv:2308.16741,
2023.
[14] D.Deutsch,R.Dror,D.Roth,Onthelimitationsofreference-freeevaluationsofgeneratedtext,in:Proceedingsofthe2022ConferenceonEmpiricalMethodsin
NaturalLanguageProcessing,AssociationforComputationalLinguistics,AbuDhabi,UnitedArabEmirates,2022,December,pp.10960–10977,Retrievedfrom,
https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.753.
[15] T.Draws,O.Inel,N.Tintarev,C.Baden,B.Timmermans,Comprehensiveviewpointrepresentationsforadeeperunderstandingofuserinteractionswithdebated
topics,in:AcmSigirConferenceonHumanInformationInteractionandRetrieval,2022,pp.135–145.
[16] T.Draws,N.Roy,O.Inel,A.Rieger,R.Hada,M.O.Yalcin,etal.,Viewpointdiversityinsearchresults,in:AdvancesinInformationRetrieval:45thEuropean
ConferenceonInformationRetrieval,ECIR2023,Dublin,Ireland,April2–6,2023,Proceedings,PartI,2023,pp.279–297.
[17] I.S.Efstathiadis,G.Paulino-Passos,F.Toni,ExplainablepatternsfordistinctionandpredictionofmoraljudgementonReddit,arXivpreprint,arXiv:2201.11155,
2022.
[18] M.ElSherief,C.Ziems,D.Muchlinski,V.Anupindi,J.Seybolt,M.DeChoudhury,D.Yang,Latenthatred:abenchmarkforunderstandingimplicithatespeech,in:
Proceedingsofthe2021ConferenceonEmpiricalMethodsinNaturalLanguageProcessing,2021,November,pp.345–363,OnlineandPuntaCana,Dominican
Republic:AssociationforComputationalLinguistics.Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.29.
[19] D.Emelin,R.LeBras,J.D.Hwang,M.Forbes,Y.Choi,Moralstories:situatedreasoningaboutnorms,intents,actions,andtheirconsequences,in:Proceedings
ofthe2021ConferenceonEmpiricalMethodsinNaturalLanguageProcessing,2021,November,pp.698–718,OnlineandPuntaCana,DominicanRepublic:
AssociationforComputationalLinguistics.Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.54.
[20] M.Forbes,J.D.Hwang,V.Shwartz,M.Sap,Y.Choi,Socialchemistry101:learningtoreasonaboutsocialandmoralnorms,in:Proceedingsofthe2020Conference
onEmpiricalMethodsinNaturalLanguageProcessing(EMNLP),2020,November,pp.653–670,Online:AssociationforComputationalLinguistics.Retrieved
fromhttps://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.48.
[21] P.Fortuna,M.Dominguez,L.Wanner,Z.Talat,DirectionsforNLPpracticesappliedtoonlinehatespeechdetection,in:Proceedingsofthe2022Confer-
enceonEmpiricalMethodsinNaturalLanguageProcessing,AssociationforComputationalLinguistics,AbuDhabi,UnitedArabEmirates,2022,December,
pp.11794–11805,Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.809.
[22] S.Gabriel,S.Hallinan,M.Sap,P.Nguyen,F.Roesner,E.Choi,Y.Choi,Misinforeactionframes:reasoningaboutreaders’reactionstonewsheadlines,in:
Proceedingsofthe60thAnnualMeetingoftheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics(Volume1:LongPapers),AssociationforComputationalLinguistics,
Dublin,Ireland,2022,May,pp.3108–3127,Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.222.
[23] G.Gao,S.Paik,C.Reardon,Y.Zhao,L.Guo,P.Ishwar,etal.,Predictionofpeople’semotionalresponsetowardsmulti-modalnews,in:Proceedingsofthe
2ndConferenceoftheAsia-PacificChapteroftheAssociationforComputationalLinguisticsandthe12thInternationalJointConferenceonNaturalLanguage
Processing(Volume1:LongPapers),2022,November,pp.364–374,Onlineonly:AssociationforComputationalLinguistics.Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.
org/2022.aacl-main.29.
[24] T.Gao,X.Yao,D.Chen,SimCSE:simplecontrastivelearningofsentenceembeddings,in:Proceedingsofthe2021ConferenceonEmpiricalMethodsinNatural
LanguageProcessing,2021,November,pp.6894–6910,OnlineandPuntaCana,DominicanRepublic:AssociationforComputationalLinguistics.Retrievedfrom
https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.552.
40

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
[25] M.Geva,D.Khashabi,E.Segal,T.Khot,D.Roth,J.Berant,DidAristotleusealaptop?Aquestionansweringbenchmarkwithimplicitreasoningstrategies,Trans.
Assoc.Comput.Linguist.9(2021)346–361,https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00370.
[26] A.Gupta,A.Agarwal,P.Singh,P.Rai,Adeepgenerativeframeworkforparaphrasegeneration,in:ProceedingsoftheThirty-SecondAAAIConferenceon
ArtificialIntelligenceandThirtiethInnovativeApplicationsofArtificialIntelligenceConferenceandEighthAAAISymposiumonEducationalAdvancesinArtificial
Intelligence,2018,pp.5149–5156.
[27] J.Haidt,C.Joseph,Intuitiveethics:howinnatelypreparedintuitionsgenerateculturallyvariablevirtues,Daedalus133(4)(2004)55–66,https://doi.org/10.
1162/0011526042365555.
[28] M.Hanna,O.Bojar,Afine-grainedanalysisofBERTScore,in:ProceedingsoftheSixthConferenceonMachineTranslation,2021,November,pp.507–517,
Online:AssociationforComputationalLinguistics.Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/2021.wmt-1.59.
[29] R.Henderson,E.McCready,Howdogwhistleswork,in:NewFrontiersinArtificialIntelligence:Jsai-Isai2017,vol.10838,2017,pp.231–240.
[30] D.Hendrycks,C.Burns,S.Basart,A.Critch,J.Li,D.Song,J.Steinhardt,AligningAIwithsharedhumanvalues,in:InternationalConferenceonLearning
Representations,2020.
[31] D.Hendrycks,M.Mazeika,A.Zou,S.Patel,C.Zhu,J.Navarro,etal.,Whatwouldjiminycricketdo?Towardsagentsthatbehavemorally,Retrievedfromhttps://
openreview.net/forum?id=G1muTb5zuO7,2021.
[32] J.Hoover,G.Portillo-Wightman,L.Yeh,S.Havaldar,A.M.Davani,Y.Lin,etal.,MoralfoundationsTwittercorpus:acollectionof35ktweetsannotatedfor
moralsentiment,Soc.Psychol.Pers.Sci.11(8)(2020)1057–1071,https://doi.org/10.1177/1948550619876629.
[33] D.Hovy,D.Yang,Theimportanceofmodelingsocialfactorsoflanguage:theoryandpractice,in:Proceedingsofthe2021ConferenceoftheNorthAmerican
ChapteroftheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics:HumanLanguageTechnologies,2021,June,pp.588–602,Online:AssociationforComputational
Linguistics.Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.49.
[34] A.Hoyle,R.Sarkar,P.Goel,P.Resnik,Makingtheimplicitexplicit:implicitcontentasafirstclasscitizeninnlp,arXivpreprint,arXiv:2305.14583,2023.
[35] F.Huang,H.Kwak,J.An,Ischatgptbetterthanhumanannotators?Potentialandlimitationsofchatgptinexplainingimplicithatespeech,in:Companion
ProceedingsoftheAcmWebConference2023,AssociationforComputingMachinery,NewYork,NY,USA,2023,pp.294–297,Retrievedfromhttps://doi.org/
10.1145/3543873.3587368.
[36] D.Ippolito,R.Kriz,J.Sedoc,M.Kustikova,C.Callison-Burch,Comparisonofdiversedecodingmethodsfromconditionallanguagemodels,in:Proceedingsof
the57thAnnualMeetingoftheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics,AssociationforComputationalLinguistics,Florence,Italy,2019,July,pp.3752–3762,
Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/P19-1365.
[37] G.Jigsaw,PerspectiveAPI,https://www.perspectiveapi.com/,2021.(Accessed2August2024),Online.
[38] Z.Jin,S.Levine,F.Gonzalez,O.Kamal,M.Sap,M.Sachan,etal.,Whentomakeexceptions:exploringlanguagemodelsasaccountsofhumanmoraljudgment,
in:AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems35(NEURIPS2022),vol.35,2022,pp.28458–28473.
[39] H.Kim,J.Hessel,L.Jiang,X.Lu,Y.Yu,P.Zhou,etal.,Soda:million-scaledialoguedistillationwithsocialcommonsensecontextualization,arXivpreprint,
arXiv:2212.10465,2022.
[40] H.W.Kuhn,TheHungarianmethodfortheassignmentproblem,Nav.Res.Logist.Q.2(1–2)(1955)83–97,https://doi.org/10.1002/nav.3800020109.
[41] H.-C.Kuo,Y.-N.Chen,Zero-shotpromptingforimplicitintentpredictionandrecommendationwithcommonsensereasoning,in:FindingsoftheAssociationfor
ComputationalLinguistics:ACL2023,AssociationforComputationalLinguistics,Toronto,Canada,2023,July,pp.249–258,Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.
org/2023.findings-acl.17.
[42] Z.Li,Y.Zou,C.Zhang,Q.Zhang,Z.Wei,Learningimplicitsentimentinaspect-basedsentimentanalysiswithsupervisedcontrastivepre-training,in:Proceedings
ofthe2021ConferenceonEmpiricalMethodsinNaturalLanguageProcessing,2021,November,pp.246–256,OnlineandPuntaCana,DominicanRepublic:
AssociationforComputationalLinguistics.Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.22.
[43] C.-Y.Lin,ROUGE:apackageforautomaticevaluationofsummaries,in:TextSummarizationBranchesOut,2004,pp.74–81.
[44] J.Lin,Q.Chen,J.Zhou,J.Jin,L.He,L.DeRaedt,Cup:Curriculumlearningbasedprompttuningforimpliciteventargumentextraction,in:Proceedingsofthe
Thirty-FirstInternationalJointConferenceonArtificialIntelligence,IJCAI-22,2022,pp.4245–4251,Retrievedfromhttps://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2022/589.
[45] Y.Lin,J.Hoover,G.Portillo-Wightman,C.Park,M.Dehghani,H.Ji,Acquiringbackgroundknowledgetoimprovemoralvalueprediction,in:2018IEEE/ACM
InternationalConferenceonAdvancesinSocialNetworksAnalysisandMining(ASONAM),2018,pp.552–559.
[46] A.Liu,Z.Wu,J.Michael,A.Suhr,P.West,A.Koller,etal.,We’reafraidlanguagemodelsaren’tmodelingambiguity,arXivpreprint,arXiv:2304.14399,2023.
[47] J.Liu,Y.Chen,J.Xu,Machinereadingcomprehensionasdataaugmentation:acasestudyonimpliciteventargumentextraction,in:Proceedingsofthe2021
ConferenceonEmpiricalMethodsinNaturalLanguageProcessing,2021,November,pp.2716–2725,OnlineandPuntaCana,DominicanRepublic:Association
forComputationalLinguistics.Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.214.
[48] P.Liu,W.Yuan,J.Fu,Z.Jiang,H.Hayashi,G.Neubig,Pre-train,prompt,andpredict:asystematicsurveyofpromptingmethodsinnaturallanguageprocessing,
ACMComput.Surv.55(9)(2023,jan.),Retrievedfromhttps://doi.org/10.1145/3560815.
[49] Y.Liu,P.Liu,D.Radev,G.Neubig,BRIO:bringingordertoabstractivesummarization,in:Proceedingsofthe60thAnnualMeetingoftheAssociationfor
ComputationalLinguistics(Volume1:LongPapers),AssociationforComputationalLinguistics,Dublin,Ireland,2022,May,pp.2890–2903,Retrievedfrom
https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.207.
[50] P.Madhyastha,A.Founta,L.Specia,Astudytowardscontextualunderstandingoftoxicityinonlineconversations,Nat.Lang.Eng.29(6)(2023)1538–1560.
[51] J.Mendelsohn,R.L.Bras,Y.Choi,M.Sap,Fromdogwhistlestobullhorns:unveilingcodedrhetoricwithlanguagemodels,arXivpreprint,arXiv:2305.17174,
2023.
[52] N.Mirzakhmedova,J.Kiesel,K.Al-Khatib,B.Stein,Unveilingthepowerofargumentarrangementinonlinepersuasivediscussions,in:H.Bouamor,J.Pino,
K.Bali(Eds.),FindingsoftheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics:EMNLP2023,AssociationforComputationalLinguistics,Singapore,2023,December,
Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/2023.findings-emnlp.1048.
[53] M.D.Muralikumar,Y.S.Yang,D.W.McDonald,Ahuman-centeredevaluationofatoxicitydetectionAPI:testingtransferabilityandunpackinglatentattributes,
ACMTrans.Soc.Comput.6(1–2)(2023)1–38.
[54] E.Musi,D.Ghosh,S.Muresan,Changemyviewthroughconcessions:doconcessionsincreasepersuasion?,DialogueDiscourse9(1)(2018)107–127.
[55] Y.Nie,A.Williams,E.Dinan,M.Bansal,J.Weston,D.Kiela,AdversarialNLI:anewbenchmarkfornaturallanguageunderstanding,in:Proceedingsofthe58th
AnnualMeetingoftheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics,2020,July,pp.4885–4901,Online:AssociationforComputationalLinguistics.Retrievedfrom
https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.441.
[56] Y.Nie,X.Zhou,M.Bansal,Whatcanwelearnfromcollectivehumanopinionsonnaturallanguageinferencedata?,in:Proceedingsofthe2020Conference
onEmpiricalMethodsinNaturalLanguageProcessing(EMNLP),2020,November,pp.9131–9143,Online:AssociationforComputationalLinguistics.Retrieved
fromhttps://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.734.
[57] N.Ocampo,E.Sviridova,E.Cabrio,S.Villata,Anin-depthanalysisofimplicitandsubtlehatespeechmessages,in:Proceedingsofthe17thConferenceofthe
EuropeanChapteroftheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics,AssociationforComputationalLinguistics,Dubrovnik,Croatia,2023,May,pp.1997–2013,
Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/2023.eacl-main.147.
[58] K.Papineni,S.Roukos,T.Ward,W.-J.Zhu,BLEU:amethodforautomaticevaluationofmachinetranslation,in:Proceedingsofthe40thAnnualMeetingofthe
AssociationforComputationalLinguistics,2002,pp.311–318.
[59] J.Pater,A.Coupe,R.Pfafman,C.Phelan,T.Toscos,M.Jacobs,StandardizingreportingofparticipantcompensationinHCI:asystematicliteraturereviewand
recommendationsforthefield,in:Proceedingsofthe2021ChiConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems,2021,pp.1–16.
41

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
[60] E.Pavlick,T.Kwiatkowski,Inherentdisagreementsinhumantextualinferences,Trans.Assoc.Comput.Linguist.7(2019)677–694,https://doi.org/10.1162/
tacl_a_00293,Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/Q19-1043.
[61] B.Plank,The“problem”ofhumanlabelvariation:ongroundtruthindata,modelingandevaluation,in:Proceedingsofthe2022ConferenceonEmpirical
MethodsinNaturalLanguageProcessing,AssociationforComputationalLinguistics,AbuDhabi,UnitedArabEmirates,2022,December,pp.10671–10682,
Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.731.
[62] V.Pyatkin,J.D.Hwang,V.Srikumar,X.Lu,L.Jiang,Y.Choi,C.Bhagavatula,ClarifyDelphi:reinforcedclarificationquestionswithdefeasibilityrewardsfor
socialandmoralsituations,in:Proceedingsofthe61stAnnualMeetingoftheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics(Volume1:LongPapers),Association
forComputationalLinguistics,Toronto,Canada,2023,July,pp.11253–11271,Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.630.
[63] L.Qian,L.Qiu,W.Zhang,X.Jiang,Y.Yu,Exploringdiverseexpressionsforparaphrasegeneration,in:Proceedingsofthe2019ConferenceonEmpiricalMethods
inNaturalLanguageProcessingandthe9thInternationalJointConferenceonNaturalLanguageProcessing(EMNLP-IJCNLP),AssociationforComputational
Linguistics,HongKong,China,2019,November,pp.3173–3182,Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/D19-1313.
[64] A.Radford,J.Wu,R.Child,D.Luan,D.Amodei,I.Sutskever,etal.,Languagemodelsareunsupervisedmultitasklearners,OpenAIBlog1(8)(2019)9.
[65] C.Raffel,N.Shazeer,A.Roberts,K.Lee,S.Narang,M.Matena,etal.,Exploringthelimitsoftransferlearningwithaunifiedtext-to-texttransformer,J.Mach.
Learn.Res.21(1)(2020)5485–5551,https://doi.org/10.5555/3455716.3455856.
[66] H.Rashkin,M.Sap,E.Allaway,N.A.Smith,Y.Choi,Event2Mind:commonsenseinferenceonevents,intents,andreactions,in:Proceedingsofthe56thAnnual
MeetingoftheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics(Volume1:LongPapers),AssociationforComputationalLinguistics,Melbourne,Australia,2018,July,
pp.463–473,Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/P18-1043.
[67] C.Rebuffel,M.Roberti,L.Soulier,G.Scoutheeten,R.Cancelliere,P.Gallinari,Controllinghallucinationsatwordlevelindata-to-textgeneration,DataMin.
Knowl.Discov.36(1)(2022)318–354,Retrievedfromhttps://doi.org/10.1007/s10618-021-00801-4.
[68] R.Rei,J.G.C.deSouza,D.Alves,C.Zerva,A.C.Farinha,T.Glushkova,etal.,COMET-22:Unbabel-IST2022submissionforthemetricssharedtask,in:Proceed-
ingsoftheSeventhConferenceonMachineTranslation(WMT),AssociationforComputationalLinguistics,AbuDhabi,UnitedArabEmirates(Hybrid),2022,
December,pp.578–585,Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/2022.wmt-1.52.
[69] R.Rei,C.Stewart,A.C.Farinha,A.Lavie,COMET:aneuralframeworkforMTevaluation,in:Proceedingsofthe2020ConferenceonEmpiricalMethodsinNatural
LanguageProcessing(EMNLP),2020,November,pp.2685–2702,Online:AssociationforComputationalLinguistics.Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/
2020.emnlp-main.213.
[70] P.Ricoeur,TheConflictofInterpretations:EssaysinHermeneutics,NorthwesternUniversityPress,Evanston,Illinois,1974.
[71] M.Sap,S.Gabriel,L.Qin,D.Jurafsky,N.A.Smith,Y.Choi,Socialbiasframes:reasoningaboutsocialandpowerimplicationsoflanguage,in:Proceedingsofthe
58thAnnualMeetingoftheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics,2020,July,pp.5477–5490,Online:AssociationforComputationalLinguistics.Retrieved
fromhttps://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.486.
[72] M.Sap,H.Rashkin,D.Chen,R.LeBras,Y.Choi,SocialIQa:commonsensereasoningaboutsocialinteractions,in:Proceedingsofthe2019Conferenceon
EmpiricalMethodsinNaturalLanguageProcessingandthe9thInternationalJointConferenceonNaturalLanguageProcessing(EMNLP-IJCNLP),Association
forComputationalLinguistics,HongKong,China,2019,November,pp.4463–4473,Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/D19-1454.
[73] K.Stasaski,M.Hearst,Semanticdiversityindialoguewithnaturallanguageinference,in:Proceedingsofthe2022ConferenceoftheNorthAmericanChapter
oftheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics:HumanLanguageTechnologies,AssociationforComputationalLinguistics,Seattle,UnitedStates,2022,July,
pp.85–98,Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/2022.naacl-main.6.
[74] Z.Talat,H.Blix,J.Valvoda,M.I.Ganesh,R.Cotterell,A.Williams,Onthemachinelearningofethicaljudgmentsfromnaturallanguage,in:Proceedingsofthe
2022ConferenceoftheNorthAmericanChapteroftheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics:HumanLanguageTechnologies,AssociationforComputational
Linguistics,Seattle,UnitedStates,2022,July,pp.769–779,Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/2022.naacl-main.56.
[75] G.Tevet,J.Berant,Evaluatingtheevaluationofdiversityinnaturallanguagegeneration,in:Proceedingsofthe16thConferenceoftheEuropeanChapterofthe
AssociationforComputationalLinguistics:MainVolume,2021,April,pp.326–346,Online:AssociationforComputationalLinguistics.Retrievedfromhttps://
aclanthology.org/2021.eacl-main.25.
[76] A.N.Uma,T.Fornaciari,D.Hovy,S.Paun,B.Plank,M.Poesio,Learningfromdisagreement:asurvey,J.Artif.Intell.Res.72(2021)1385–1470,https://
doi.org/10.1613/jair.1.12752.
[77] V.Veselovsky,M.H.Ribeiro,R.West,Artificialartificialartificialintelligence:crowdworkerswidelyuselargelanguagemodelsfortextproductiontasks,arXiv
preprint,arXiv:2306.07899,2023.
[78] A.Vijayakumar,M.Cogswell,R.Selvaraju,Q.Sun,S.Lee,D.Crandall,D.Batra,Diversebeamsearchforimproveddescriptionofcomplexscenes,in:Proceedings
oftheAAAIConferenceonArtificialIntelligence,vol.32,2018.
[79] P.Vijayaraghavan,D.Roy,Modelinghumanmotivesandemotionsfrompersonalnarrativesusingexternalknowledgeandentitytracking,in:Proceedingsof
theWebConference2021,2021,pp.529–540.
[80] B.Wang,C.-C.J.Kuo,H.Li,Justrank:rethinkingevaluationwithwordandsentencesimilarities,in:Proceedingsofthe60thAnnualMeetingoftheAssociation
forComputationalLinguistics(Volume1:LongPapers),AssociationforComputationalLinguistics,Dublin,Ireland,2022,May,pp.6060–6077,Retrievedfrom
https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.419.
[81] A.Welivita,P.Pu,Ataxonomyofempatheticresponseintentsinhumansocialconversations,in:Proceedingsofthe28thInternationalConferenceonComputa-
tionalLinguistics,Barcelona,Spain,2020,December,pp.4886–4899,(Online):InternationalCommitteeonComputationalLinguistics.Retrievedfrom,https://
aclanthology.org/2020.coling-main.429.
[82] M.Wiegand,M.Geulig,J.Ruppenhofer,Implicitlyabusivecomparisons–anewdatasetandlinguisticanalysis,in:Proceedingsofthe16thConferenceofthe
EuropeanChapteroftheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics:MainVolume,2021,April,pp.358–368,Online:AssociationforComputationalLinguistics.
Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/2021.eacl-main.27.
[83] H.Wu,H.Zhou,M.Lan,Y.Wu,Y.Zhang,Connectivepredictionforimplicitdiscourserelationrecognitionviaknowledgedistillation,in:Proceedingsofthe61st
AnnualMeetingoftheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics(Volume1:LongPapers),AssociationforComputationalLinguistics,Toronto,Canada,2023,
July,pp.5908–5923,Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.325.
[84] Y.Wu,X.Ma,D.Yang,Personalizedresponsegenerationviagenerativesplitmemorynetwork,in:Proceedingsofthe2021ConferenceoftheNorthAmerican
ChapteroftheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics:HumanLanguageTechnologies,2021,June,pp.1956–1970,Online:AssociationforComputational
Linguistics.Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.157.
[85] W.Xiang,B.Wang,Asurveyofimplicitdiscourserelationrecognition,ACMComput.Surv.55(12)(2023,mar),https://doi.org/10.1145/3574134,Retrieved
fromhttps://doi.org/10.1145/3574134.
[86] Z.Yang,S.Hooshmand,J.Hirschberg,CHoRaL:collectinghumorreactionlabelsfrommillionsofsocialmediausers,in:Proceedingsofthe2021Conferenceon
EmpiricalMethodsinNaturalLanguageProcessing,2021,November,pp.4429–4435,OnlineandPuntaCana,DominicanRepublic:AssociationforComputational
Linguistics.Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.364.
[87] W.Yu,C.Zhu,T.Zhao,Z.Guo,M.Jiang,Sentence-permutedparagraphgeneration,in:Proceedingsofthe2021ConferenceonEmpiricalMethodsinNatural
LanguageProcessing,2021,November,pp.5051–5062,OnlineandPuntaCana,DominicanRepublic:AssociationforComputationalLinguistics.Retrievedfrom
https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.412.
[88] T.Zhang,V.Kishore,F.Wu,K.Q.Weinberger,Y.Artzi,BERTScore:evaluatingtextgenerationwithBERT,in:InternationalConferenceonLearningRepresenta-
tions,2020,Retrievedfromhttps://openreview.net/forum?id=SkeHuCVFDr.
42

L.Allein,M.M.TruşcaˇandM.-F.Moens ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104234
[89] W.Zhao,M.Peyrard,F.Liu,Y.Gao,C.M.Meyer,S.Eger,MoverScore:textgenerationevaluatingwithcontextualizedembeddingsandEarthmoverdistance,
in:Proceedingsofthe2019ConferenceonEmpiricalMethodsinNaturalLanguageProcessingandthe9thInternationalJointConferenceonNaturalLanguage
Processing(EMNLP-IJCNLP),AssociationforComputationalLinguistics,HongKong,China,2019,November,pp.563–578,Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.
org/D19-1053.
[90] D.Zhou,J.Wang,L.Zhang,Y.He,Implicitsentimentanalysiswithevent-centeredtextrepresentation,in:Proceedingsofthe2021ConferenceonEmpiricalMeth-
odsinNaturalLanguageProcessing,2021,November,pp.6884–6893,OnlineandPuntaCana,DominicanRepublic:AssociationforComputationalLinguistics.
Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.551.
[91] J.Zhou,S.Bhat,Paraphrasegeneration:asurveyofthestateoftheart,in:Proceedingsofthe2021ConferenceonEmpiricalMethodsinNaturalLanguage
Processing,2021,November,pp.5075–5086,OnlineandPuntaCana,DominicanRepublic:AssociationforComputationalLinguistics.Retrievedfromhttps://
aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.414.
[92] C.Ziems,J.Yu,Y.-C.Wang,A.Halevy,D.Yang,Themoralintegritycorpus:abenchmarkforethicaldialoguesystems,in:Proceedingsofthe60thAnnualMeeting
oftheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics(Volume1:LongPapers),AssociationforComputationalLinguistics,Dublin,Ireland,2022,May,pp.3755–3773,
Retrievedfromhttps://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.261.
43

