ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104245
ContentslistsavailableatScienceDirect
Artificial Intelligence
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/artint
Online learning in sequential Bayesian persuasion: Handling
✩
unknown priors
Martino Bernasconi∗, Matteo Castiglioni, Alberto Marchesi, Nicola Gatti,
Francesco Trovò
PolitecnicodiMilano,PiazzaLeonardodaVinci32,Milan,Italy
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords: We study a repeated information designproblem faced by an informed senderwho tries to influence
Online learning the behavior of a self-interested receiver, through the provision of payoff-relevant information.
Bayesian persuasion We consider settings where the receiver repeatedly faces a sequential decision making (SDM)
Sequentialdecisionmaking
problem. At each round, the sender observes the realizations of random events in the SDM
problem, which are only partially observable by the receiver. This begets the challenge of how
to incrementally disclose such information to the receiver to persuadethem to follow (desirable)
action recommendations. We study the case in which the sender does notknow random events
probabilities, and, thus, they have to gradually learn them while persuading the receiver. We
start by providing a non-trivial polytopal approximation of the set of the sender’s persuasive
information-revelation structures. This is crucial to design efficient learning algorithms. Next,
we prove a negative result which also applies to the non-sequential case: no learning algorithm
can be persuasive in high probability. Thus, we relax the persuasiveness requirement, studying
algorithms that guarantee that the receiver’s regret in following recommendations grows sub-
linearly. In the full-feedbacksetting—where the sen√der observes the realizations of allthe possible
random events—, we provide an algorithm with 𝑂̃ ( 𝑇)regret for both the sender and the receiver.
Instead, in the bandit-feedbacksetting—where the sender only observes the realizations of random
events actually occurring in the SDM problem—, we design an algorithm that, given an 𝛼∈[1∕2, 1]
as input, guarantees 𝑂̃ (𝑇𝛼)and 𝑂̃ (𝑇max{𝛼,1−𝛼 2})regrets, for the sender and the receiver respectively.
This result is complemented by a lower bound showing that such a regret trade-off is tight for
𝛼∈[1∕2, 2∕3].
1. Introduction
Bayesian persuasion[2](a.k.a.information design) is the problem faced by an informed senderwho aims to influence the behavior
of a self-interested receivervia the strategic provision of payoff-relevant information. This captures the problem of “who gets to know
what”, which is fundamental in all economic interactions. Bayesian persuasion is ubiquitous in real-world problems, such as, e.g., on-
✩ A short version of this article appeared in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
2022[1].
* Correspondingauthor.
E-mailaddresses:martino.bernasconideluca@polimi.it(M.Bernasconi),matteo.castiglioni@polimi.it(M.Castiglioni),alberto.marchesi@polimi.it(A.Marchesi),
nicola.gatti@polimi.it(N.Gatti),francesco1.trovo@polimi.it(F.Trovò).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2024.104245
Received 17 July 2023; Received in revised form 1 March 2024; Accepted 3 November 2024
Availableonline6November2024
0004-3702/©2024ElsevierB.V.Allrightsarereserved,includingthosefortextanddatamining,AItraining,andsimilartechnologies.

M.Bernasconi,M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesietal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104245
line advertising[3–6], voting[7–10], traffic routing[11,12], recommendation systems[13], security[14,15], and marketing[16,17].
Some recent works also address the problem of dealing with uncertain parameters in Bayesian persuasion, boosting its applicability
in concrete settings[18–23].
In this paper, we study Bayesian persuasion in settings where the receiver plays in a sequential decision-making(SDM) problem. An
SDM problem is characterized by a tree structure composed of decisionnodes, where the receiver makes actions, and chancenodes,
in which partially observablerandom events occur. The sender perfectly observes the realizations of random events, and their goal
is to incrementally disclose the acquired information to induce the receiver towards outcomes that are desirable for them. This is
not an easy feat when the sender and receiver have different utilities. To do so, the sender commits to a signaling schemespecifying
a probability distribution over action recommendations for the receiver at each decision node. Specifically, the sender commits
to a persuasivesignaling scheme, meaning that the receiver is incentivized to follow recommendations. We consider the case of a
farsightedreceiver, meaning that they take into account all the possible future events when deciding whether to deviate or not from
recommendations at each decision node.
With some notable exceptions (such as, e.g., [24,25]), Bayesian persuasion models available in the literature make the strin-
gent assumption that both the sender and receiver know the prior, which, in our setting, is defined by the probabilities associated
with random events in the SDM problem. We relax such an assumption by considering an online learning framework in which the
sender, without any knowledge of the prior, repeatedly interacts with the receiver and gradually learns the prior while still issuing
recommendations.
The model studied in this paper fits many real-world settings. For example, an e-commerce platform that issues customized
information about products to its users, a recommendation system in a multi-media platforms that has to decide which content to
suggest in order to keep users entertained (while still turning a profit), and navigation systems. In the following, we provide an in
depth example on the latter application of a navigation app sending route recommendations to a driver. The app (sender) gets to
know information about traffic congestion sequentially, as the driver progresses on their route. This is because traffic congestion
might change during the trip, especially for long routes. Moreover, at any point in time, the app can send recommendations to the
driver (receiver), who in turn has to take decisions on which routes to choose. The app and the driver might have different utilities. For
example, the app may aim to minimize overall traffic congestion, while the driver may aim to minimize their travel time. Moreover,
the driver interacts with the app multiple times, and, thus, the application must provide good recommendations (i.e., persuasive) to
the receiver, otherwise they would switch to another navigation app.
1.1. Original contributions
Our goal is to design online learning algorithms that are no-regret for the sender while being persuasive for the receiver. In
particular, in Section5, we provide a non-trivial polytopal approximation of the set of the sender’s persuasive signaling schemes. This
approximation leverages the sequence-form formulation of the SDM problem, which gives a convenient representation of the signaling
scheme. Intuitively, in this representation, both the sender’s utility and the receiver’s increase in utility after a single deviation are
linear.
This representation is crucial in designing efficient (i.e., polynomial-time) learning algorithms, and it also shows how a sender-
optimal signaling scheme can be found in polynomial time in the offline version of our problem, which may be of independent
interest. Next, inSection7, we prove a negative result which also applies to the non-sequential case: when the prior is unknown no
algorithm can be persuasive at each round with high probability. This is not surprising, as it is easy to imagine a sender that is uncertain
over two instances with different priors in which the sets of persuasive signaling schemes are disjoint. We prove our negative result by
providing a pair of such instances. In the attempt to provide algorithms that be applied to any prior, we deal with this impossibility by
relaxing the persuasiveness constraint. In particular, we study learning algorithms guaranteeing that the receiver’s regret in following
recommendations grows sub-linearly while guaranteeing the same for the sender’s regret. In particular, we design learning algorithms
for two different settings.
First, inSection8, we study the full-feedbackcase, where the sender observes the realizat√ions of allthe random events that may
potentially happen in the SDM problem. In such a setting, we provide an algorithm with 𝑂̃ ( 𝑇)regret for both the sender and the
receiver. The algorithm keeps track of a confidence set of the set of persuasive signaling schemes and chooses signaling schemes
optimistically with respect to this set.
Then, in Section 9, we focus on the bandit-feedbacksetting, where the sender only observes the realizations of random events
on the path in the tree traversed during the SDM problem. The challenge of this scenario stems from the fact that, when ignoring
the prior, neither the sender nor the receiver knows the magnitude of the violation of the persuasiveness constraints. Thus, our
algorithm performs a preliminary uniform exploration phase of the tree. The algorithm keeps track of a high-probability set of
possible priors. After the exploration phase, the algorithm fixes the set of signaling schemes to use in the remaining steps in which
it will act optimistically with respect to both the prior and the signaling scheme. In this case, we design an algorithm that achieves
𝑂̃ (𝑇𝛼)sender’s regret and 𝑂̃ (𝑇max{𝛼,1−𝛼 2})receiver’s regret, for any 𝛼∈[1∕2, 1]given as input. Finally, inSection9.3, we provide a
lower bound showing that the regrets trade-off achieved by our algorithm is tight for 𝛼∈[1∕2, 2∕3]. This trade-off nature between
utility and constraint violation is non-standard and might be of independent interest to other online learning problems. Moreover,
our lower bound essentially proves the need for the exploration phase. Indeed our lower bound is built on instances in which there
are portions of the tree that are sub-optimal—not being played in the optimal solution—, yet are needed to be explored to know the
set of persuasive signaling schemes.
2

M.Bernasconi,M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesietal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104245
1.2. Related works
In the following, we provide a survey of works that are somehow related to ours, discussing their main differences.
Work byZu etal.[24] The work that is most related to ours is the one byZu etal.[24], who study a (non-sequential) Bayesian
persuasion problem in which the sender and the receiver do not know the prior and they √are involved in repeated interaction. In
such a non-sequential model, Zu etal.[24]provide a learning algorithm that achieves 𝑂̃ ( 𝑇)sender’s regret with respect to the
best-in-hindsight signaling scheme that one can produce when knowing the prior, while at the same time being persuasive across
all rounds with high probability. This result requires some regularity assumptions over the prior that may not hold in the general
case and that, in the sequential case, appear to be even more severe. In the attempt to design algorithms that can be applied with
any prior, we adopt a fundamentally different approach, which involves relaxing the persuasiveness assumption and trading off the
sender’s and receiver’s regret.
Bayesian persuasion in Markov decision processes Recently, some works addressed Bayesian persuasion in settings in which the
sender and the receiver are involved in a sequential interaction, focusing on Markov decision processes (MDPs). In particular, Gan
etal.[26]andWu etal.[27]show how to efficiently find a sender-optimal signaling policy when the receiver is myopic(i.e., they
only optimize one-step rewards) in MDPs with infinite and finite horizon, respectively. On the other hand Bernasconi et al. [28]
studied the problem of persuading farsighted receivers in MDPs. However, both Gan etal.[26]and Bernasconi etal.[28]assume
that the environment is known, and, thus, they only focus on the (offline) sender’s optimization problem. On the other hand,Wu
etal.[27]also consider an online learning framework in which the sender has √to learn the prior, as well as their rewards and the
transition kernel of the MDP. They provide a learning algorithm that achieves 𝑂̃ ( 𝑇)sender’s regret, while at the same time guaran-
teeing persuasive recommendations to the (myopic) receiver. These works considerably differ from ours, since our model involves a
farsighted receiver and the fact that the latter may have partial observability over realizations of random events. More in particular,
we can model any information revelation structure in the sequential problem, like the case in which the receiver can distinguish
between some nature’s states but not others (seeFig.1for an example). Let us remark thatGan etal.[26]also study a variation of
their model in which the receiver is farsighted, showing that, in such a setting, the problem of finding a sender-optimal signaling
policy isNP-hard to approximate. As a result,Gan etal.[26]do notprovide any algorithmic result for their model with a farsighted
receiver. On the other hand, in our model, we consider farsighted receivers. However, this does not contradict our result, as we have
a tree-like structure of the game which allows efficient algorithms. Moreover, even if any MDP could be converted into our sequential
decision model framework, this transformation is not efficient and thus we cannot use our algorithm to solve persuasion problems
with farsighted receivers in MDPs.
Other works on sequential Bayesian persuasion models It is also worth citing that other works study sequential versions of Bayesian
persuasion, though they are not related to ours as much as [26] and [27]. Among these works, Celli et al. [29] study Bayesian
persuasion with multiple receivers interacting in a sequential game with imperfect information. Differently from ours, their model
adopts a different notion of persuasiveness, known as ex antepersuasiveness, and it assumes that the prior is known. Very recently,Su
etal.[30]andNi etal.[31]initiate the study of settings where the sender and the receiver repeatedly interact in a one-shot Bayesian
persuasion problem, with the sender committing to a sequence of signaling schemes in which, at each round of the interaction, the
sender’s choice depends on the outcomes of all the previous rounds and is consistent with the receiver’s posterior believes at that
round. These works assume that the prior is known to both the sender and the receiver, and, thus, they considerably depart from
ours.
Bayesian persuasion with unknown receivers’ types Over the last years, some works (see, e.g.,[18,32,33]) addressed the problem of
relaxing Bayesian persuasion assumptions by considering the case in which the sender does not know receivers’ payoffs. In partic-
ular, Castiglioni et al. [18,32] consider an online learning framework in which the sender repeatedly interacts with a stream of
receivers whose types are selected beforehand by an adversary. These latter works use techniques inherited from the online learning
literature as we do in this paper; however, their adoption is fundamentally different from the one we undertake in this paper.
Online learning in SDM problems with constraints Another line of research, which uses techniques that are similar to those employed in
this paper, studies learning in SDM problems in which the learner has to satisfy unknown constraints[34,35]. In particular,Bernasconi
etal.[35]study the learning problem faced by a single agent in a repeated SDM problem with both rewards and costs. The authors
study a setting in which the goal of the learner is to maximize long-term rewards while guaranteeing that some cost constraints are
satisfied in the long term, thus allowing for the constraints to be violated during some rounds. The problem that we study in this
paper is similar, but it raises considerable additional challenges due to the structure of the persuasiveness constraints.
2. Preliminaries
2.1. Sequential decision making problems
An instance of an SDM problem is defined by a tree structure, utilities, and random events probabilities. The tree structure has
a set of nodes ∶= ∪ 𝑑∪ 𝑐, where: contains all the terminal nodesin which the problem ends (corresponding to the leaves
3

M.Bernasconi,M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesietal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104245
of the tree),  𝑑 is the set of decision nodesin which the agent acts, while  𝑐 is the set of chance nodeswhere random events occur.
Given any non-terminal node ℎ ∈⧵, we let 𝐴(ℎ)be the set of arcs outgoing from ℎ. If ℎ ∈ 𝑑, then 𝐴(ℎ)is the set of receiver’s
actions available at ℎ, while, if ℎ ∈ 𝑐, then 𝐴(ℎ)encodes the possible outcomes of the random event occurring at ℎ. Furthermore,
the utility function 𝑢 ∶ →[0, 1]defines the agent’s payoff 𝑢(𝑧)when the problem ends in terminal node 𝑧 ∈. Finally, each chance
node ℎ ∈ 𝑐is characterized by a probability distribution 𝜇 ℎ∈Δ𝐴(ℎ)over the possible outcomes of the corresponding random event,
with 𝜇 ℎ(𝑎)denoting the probability of action 𝑎 ∈𝐴(ℎ).1
In an SDM problem, the agent has imperfect information, since they do notperfectly observe the outcomes of random events. Thus,
the set of decision nodes  𝑑 is partitioned into information sets(infosets for short), where an infoset 𝐼⊆ 𝑑 is a subset of decision
nodes that are indistinguishable for the agent. We denote the set of infosets as . For every infoset 𝐼∈and pair of nodes ℎ, ℎ′∈𝐼,
it must be the case that 𝐴(ℎ) =𝐴(ℎ′) =∶𝐴(𝐼), otherwise the agent could distinguish between the two nodes. We assume that the
agent has perfect recall, which means that they never forget information once acquired. Formally, this is equivalent to assuming that,
for every infoset 𝐼∈, all the paths from the root of the tree to a node ℎ ∈𝐼 identify the same ordered sequence of agent’s actions.
2.2. Bayesian persuasion in sequential decision making problems
We study Bayesian persuasion in SDM(BPSDM) problems. These extend the Bayesian persuasion framework[2]to SDM problems
by introducing an exogenous agent that acts as a senderby issuing signals to the decision-making agent (the receiver).2By following
the Bayesian persuasion terminology, the probability distributions 𝜇 ℎfor each chance node ℎare collectively referred to as the prior.
Thus, the sender observes the realizations of random events occurring in the SDM problem and can partially disclose information to
influence the receiver’s behavior. Moreover, the sender’s utility function is defined over terminal nodes, denoted as 𝑓 ∶ →[0, 1],
and their goal is to commit to a publicly known signaling schemethat maximizes their utility in expectation with respect to the prior,
the signaling scheme, and the receiver’s strategy.
Formally, a signaling scheme for the sender defines a probability distribution 𝜙 ℎ∈Δ𝑆(ℎ) at each decision node ℎ ∈ 𝑑, where
𝑆(ℎ) is a finite set of signals available at ℎ. During the SDM problem, when the receiver reaches a node ℎ ∈ 𝑑 belonging to an
infoset 𝐼∈, the sender draws a signal 𝑠 ∼𝜙 ℎ and communicates it to the receiver. Then, based on the history of signals observed
from the beginning of the SDM problem (𝑠included), the receiver computes a posteriorbelief over the nodes belonging to the infoset
𝐼 and plays so as to maximize their expected utility in the SDM sub-problem that starts from 𝐼, taking into account the just acquired
information.
As customary in these settings, a simple revelation-principle-style argument allows us to focus on signaling schemes that are direct
and persuasive[2,36]. In particular, a signaling scheme is direct if signals correspond to action recommendations, namely 𝑆(ℎ) =𝐴(ℎ)
for all ℎ ∈ 𝑑. A direct signaling scheme is persuasive if the receiver is incentivized to follow action recommendations issued by the
sender. Moreover, we assume that, if the receiver does not follow action recommendations at some decision node, then the sender
stops issuing recommendations at nodes later reached during the SDM problem. This is without loss of generality. We refer to[37,38]
for a discussion on a similar problem in the field of correlation in sequential games.
2.3. The sequence-form representation
The sequence formis a commonly-used, compact way of representing (mixed) strategiesin SDM problems[39]. In this work, the
sequence-form representation will be employed for the receiver’s strategies, and to encode the signaling schemes and priors, as we
describe in the following.
Receiver’s strategies Given any ℎ ∈, we let 𝜎 𝑟(ℎ)be the ordered sequenceof the receiver’s actions on the path from the root of the
tree to node ℎ. By the perfect recall assumption, given any infoset 𝐼∈, it holds that 𝜎 𝑟(ℎ) =𝜎 𝑟(ℎ′) =∶𝜎 𝑟(𝐼)for every pair of nodes
ℎ, ℎ′∈𝐼. Thus, we can identify sequences with infoset-action pairs, with 𝜎=(𝐼, 𝑎) encoding the sequence of actions obtained by
appending action 𝑎 ∈𝐴(𝐼)at the end of 𝜎 𝑟(𝐼), for any infoset 𝐼∈. Moreover, ∅denotes the empty sequence. Hence, the receiver’s
sequences are Σ𝑟∶={(𝐼,𝑎)∣𝐼∈,𝑎∈𝐴(𝐼)}∪{∅}. In the sequence-form representation, mixed strategies are defined by specifying
the probability of playing each sequence of actions. Thus, a receiver’s strategy is represented by a vector 𝒙∈[0, 1]|Σ𝑟| , where 𝒙[𝜎]
encodes the realization probability of sequence 𝜎∈Σ𝑟. Furthermore, a sequence-form strategy is well-defined if and only if it satisfies
the following linear constraints:
∑
𝒙[∅]=1 and 𝒙[𝜎 𝑟(𝐼)]= 𝒙[𝜎 𝑟(𝐼)𝑎] ∀𝐼∈.
𝑎∈𝐴(𝐼)
We denote by  𝑟 the polytope of all receiver’s sequence-form strategies. We will also need to work with the sets of receiver’s
strategies in the SDM sub-problem that starts from an infoset 𝐼∈, formally defined as:
{ }
 𝑟,𝐼∶= 𝒙∈ 𝑟∣𝒙[𝜎 𝑟(𝐼)]=1 .
1 For a finite set 𝑋we denote with Δ𝑋the set of probability distributions over 𝑋.
2 In Section3, we show that BPSDM reduces to classical Bayesian persuasion when there is no sequentiality.
4

M.Bernasconi,M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesietal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104245
Signaling schemes We represent signaling schemes in sequence form by leveraging the fact that the sender can be thought of as a
perfect-information agent who plays at the decision nodes of the SDM problem since their actions co{rrespond to recommenda}tions for
the receiver. Thus, since the sender’s infosets correspond to decision nodes, their sequences Σ𝑠∶= (ℎ,𝑎)∣ℎ∈ 𝑑,𝑎∈𝐴(ℎ) ∪{∅}.
Then, we denote the polytope of (sequence-form) signaling schemes as Φ ⊆[0, 1]|Σ𝑠| , where each signaling scheme is represented as
a vector 𝝓∈[0, 1]|Σ𝑠| satisfying:
∑
𝝓[∅]=1 and 𝝓[𝜎 𝑠(ℎ)]= 𝑎∈𝐴(ℎ)𝝓[𝜎 𝑠(ℎ)𝑎] ∀ℎ∈ 𝑑,
where, similarly to 𝜎 𝑟(ℎ)for the receiver, 𝜎 𝑠(ℎ)denotes the sender’s sequence identified by ℎ ∈. We also define Π ∶=Φ ∩{0, 1}|Σ𝑠|
as the set of deterministicsignaling schemes, which are those that recommend a single action with probability one at each decision
node.
Priors We also encode prior probability distributions 𝜇 ℎ using the sequence form. Indeed, these can be thought of as elements of a
fixed strategy played by a (fictitious) perfect-information agent that acts at chance nodes. Thus, for such a chance agent, we define
Σ𝑐,  𝑐, and 𝜎 𝑐(ℎ)as their counterparts previously introduced for the receiver. Moreover, in the following, we denote by 𝝁⋆∈ 𝑐 the
(sequence-form) prior, recursively defined as follows:
𝝁⋆[∅]∶=1 and 𝝁⋆[𝜎 𝑐(ℎ)𝑎]∶=𝝁⋆[𝜎 𝑐(ℎ)]𝜇 ℎ(𝑎) ∀ℎ∈ 𝑐,∀𝑎∈𝐴(ℎ).
Note the prior distribution over nodes ℎof an infoset 𝐼 is obtained by normalizing the sequence-form prior as follows:
∑𝝁⋆[𝜎 𝑐(ℎ)]
,
𝝁⋆[𝜎 𝑐(ℎ′)]
ℎ′∈𝐼
which defines a distribution over nodes ℎ ∈𝐼.
Ordering of sequences For the sake of presentation, we introduce a partial ordering relation among sequences. Given two sequences
𝜎=(𝐼, 𝑎) ∈Σ𝑟 and 𝜎′=(𝐽, 𝑏) ∈Σ𝑟, we write 𝜎⪯𝜎′ (read as 𝜎 precedes𝜎′), whenever there exists a path in the tree connecting a
node in 𝐼 to a node in 𝐽, and such a path includes action 𝑎. We adopt analogous definitions for sequences in Σ𝑠and Σ𝑐.
2.4. Additional notation
We introduce some additional notation that will be useful in the proofs. Fig.A.4summarizes the notation used in the paper.
We denote by Π𝑟 ∶= 𝑟 ∩{0, 1}|Σ𝑟| the set of deterministic sequence-form strategies (a.k.a. pure strategies) of the receiver,
which are the strategies specifying to play a single action with probability one at each infoset. The set of receiver’s determin-
istic strategies in the SDM sub-problem that starts from an infoset 𝐼 ∈ is denoted as Π𝑟,𝐼 ∶= 𝑟,𝐼 ∩{0, 1}|Σ𝑟| . Moreover, we
l{et Σ𝑟,𝐼 ⊆Σ𝑟 be the set of receiver’s seq}uences in the SDM sub-problem that starts from an infoset 𝐼 ∈; formally, Σ𝑟,𝐼 ∶=
𝜎∈Σ𝑟∣𝜎 𝑟(𝐼)⪯𝜎∧∃𝑧∈(𝐼)∶𝜎⪯𝜎 𝑟(𝑧) .
Given any infoset 𝐼∈, we let (𝐼) ⊂be the set of terminal nodes 𝑧 ∈such that the path from the root of the tree to 𝑧passes
through a node in 𝐼. Moreover, given 𝜎=(𝐼, 𝑎)with 𝑎 ∈𝐴(𝐼), we define (𝜎) =(𝐼, 𝑎) ⊂(𝐼)as the set of terminal nodes whose
corresponding paths include playing action 𝑎at a node in 𝐼. For every infoset 𝐼∈, we also introduce a function ℎ 𝐼 ∶𝑍(𝐼) →𝐼
such that ℎ 𝐼(𝑧)defines the unique node ℎ ∈𝐼 on the path from the root of the tree to 𝑧.
Given an infoset 𝐼∈and an action 𝑎 ∈𝐴(𝐼), we define 𝐶(𝐼, 𝑎) ⊆as the set of all the infosets which immediately follow infoset
𝐼 through action 𝑎, i.e., those infosets 𝐽∈ such that 𝜎 𝑟(𝐽) =(𝐼, 𝑎). Moreover, we let 𝐶(𝐼) ⊆ be the set of all infosets that follow
, i.e., those infosets 𝐽∈such that there exists𝑎 ∈𝐴(𝐼)with 𝜎=(𝐼, 𝑎)such that 𝜎⪯𝜎 𝑟(𝐽).
3. Example of BPSDM problem
Initially, we illustrate a simple instance of the SDM problem to further clarify the notation and the concept introduced in the
previous section and its relationship with the BPDSM problem.
Example of BPSDM Fig.1shows a tree whose set of chance nodes is  𝑐={ℎ 0}, while the set of decision nodes is  𝑑={ℎ 1, ℎ 2, ℎ 3}.
The set of terminal nodes is  ={𝑧 1, … , 𝑧 6}. Moreover, the set of decision nodes  𝑑 is partitioned into the set partition ={𝐼, 𝐽},
which is made by two infosets 𝐼={ℎ }and 𝐽={ℎ , ℎ }.
1 2 3
The sets of sequences are constructed as follows. For the chance, we have that Σ𝑐={(ℎ 0, 𝑎), (ℎ 0, 𝑏), (ℎ 0, 𝑐)}, while for the agent
we have that Σ𝑟={(𝐼, 𝑑), (𝐼, 𝑒), (𝐽, 𝑓), (𝐽, 𝑔)}. Let us remark that, since the agent cannot distinguish between nodes ℎ and ℎ 3, it
2
only has 2sequences originating from such nodes; namely (𝐽, 𝑓)and (𝐽, 𝑔). In the BPSDM problem, the agent plays the role of the
receiver, while the sender can be thought of as a perfect-information agent selecting action recommendations for the receiver at
decision nodes. Therefore, the sender’s set of sequences is Σ𝑠={(ℎ 1, 𝑑), (ℎ 1, 𝑒), (ℎ 2, 𝑓), (ℎ 2, 𝑔), (ℎ 3, 𝑓), (ℎ 3, 𝑔)}.
5

M.Bernasconi,M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesietal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104245
Fig.1.ExampleofSDMproblemanditssetsofsequencesΣ𝑟,Σ𝑠,andΣ𝑐.
4. Learning to persuade
𝝁⋆
In this work, we relax the strong assumption that both the sender and the receiver know the prior by casting the BPSDM
problem into an online learning frameworkin which the sender repeatedly interacts with the receiver over a time horizon of length 𝑇.
At each round 𝑡 ∈[𝑇], the interaction goes as follows3: (i) the sender commits to a signaling scheme 𝝓 𝑡∈Φ; (ii) a vector 𝒚 𝑡∈{0, 1}|Σ𝑐|
𝝁⋆
encoding realizations of random events is drawn according to ; (iii) the sender and the receiver play an instance of the (one-shot)
BPSDM problem (detailed in Section2.2), in which the sender commits to 𝝓 𝑡, random events at chance nodes are realized as defined
by 𝒚 𝑡, and the receiver sticks to the recommendations issued by the sender; and (iv) the sender observes a feedbackon the realization of
random events at chance nodes, which can be of two types: full feedbackwhen the sender observes 𝒚 𝑡, which specifies the realizations
of all the random events at chance nodes that are possibly reachable during the SDM problem; bandit feedback when the sender
observes the terminal node 𝑧 𝑡∈reached at the end of the SDM problem. The latter is equivalent to observing the realizations of
random events at the chance nodes that are actually reached during the SDM problem, namely 𝜎 𝑐(𝑧 𝑡).
Φ⋄(𝝁⋆)be
By letting the set of persuasive signaling schemes, i.e., such that the receiver is incentivized to follow recommendations
(a formal definition is provided in Definition2), the goal of the sender is to select a sequence of signaling schemes, namely 𝝓 1, … , 𝝓 𝑇,
which maximizes their expected utility, while guaranteeing that each signaling scheme 𝝓 𝑡is persuasive, namely 𝝓 𝑡∈Φ⋄(𝝁⋆).
We measure the performance of a sequence 𝝓 1, … , 𝝓 𝑇 of signaling schemes by comparing it with an optimal (fixed) persuasive
signaling scheme. Formally, given a signaling scheme 𝝓∈Φ, we first define 𝑈(𝝓, 𝝁⋆), respectively 𝐹(𝝓, 𝝁⋆), as the expected utility
achieved by the receiver, respectively the sender, whenever the former follows action recommendations. These can be expressed as
linear functions of 𝝓, which, for any 𝝁∈ 𝑐, are defined as follows:
∑ ∑
𝑈(𝝓,𝝁)∶= 𝝁[𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]𝝓[𝜎 𝑠(𝑧)]𝑢(𝑧), 𝐹(𝝓,𝝁)∶= 𝝁[𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]𝝓[𝜎 𝑠(𝑧)]𝑓(𝑧).
𝑧∈ 𝑧∈
Finally, by letting 𝝓⋆ ∈argmax𝝓∈Φ⋄(𝝁⋆)𝐹(𝝓, 𝝁⋆)be an optimal (fixed) persuasive signaling scheme, the sender’ performance over
𝑇 rounds is measured by the (cumulative) sender’s regret:
( )
∑
𝑅 𝑇 ∶= 𝑡∈[𝑇] 𝐹(𝝓⋆,𝝁⋆)−𝐹(𝝓 𝑡,𝝁⋆) .
The goal is to design learning algorithms (for the sender) which select sequences of persuasive signaling schemes such that 𝑅 𝑇
grows asymptotically sub-linearly in 𝑇, namely 𝑅 𝑇 =𝑜(𝑇).
5. On the characterization of persuasive signaling schemes
5.1. A local decomposition of persuasiveness
Φ⋄(𝝁⋆)as
In this section, we formally introduce the set of persuasive signaling schemes the set of signaling schemes for which
the receiver’s expected utility by following recommendations is greater than the one provided by an optimal deviation policy(DP).4In
addition, we show how to decompose any DP into components defined locally at each infoset, which will be crucial in the following
Section5.2. Intuitively, a DP for the receiver is specified by two elements: (i) a set of deviation pointsin which the DP prescribes to
stop following action recommendations; and (ii) the continuation strategiesto be adopted after deviating from recommendations.
We represent deviation points by vectors 𝝎∈{0, 1}|Σ𝑟| , which are defined so that 𝝎[𝜎] =1 if and only if the DP prescribes to
deviate upon observing the sequence of action recommendations 𝜎∈Σ𝑟. Moreover, by leveraging the w.l.o.g. assumption that the
sender stops issuing recommendations after the receiver deviated from them, we focus on DPs such that each path from the root of
the tree to a terminal node involves only one deviation point. This is standard result when dealing with sequential recommendations
(see [37]for an example). As a result, the set of all valid vectors 𝝎∈{0, 1}|Σ𝑟| is formally defined as
{ }
| ∑
|
Ω∶= 𝝎∈{0,1}|Σ𝑟|| | 𝝎[𝜎]≤1 ∀𝑧∈ .
|𝜎∈Σ𝑟∶𝜎⪯𝜎𝑟(𝑧)
3 Throughout this work, for 𝑛 ∈ℕ, we denote with [𝑛]the set {1, … , 𝑛}.
4 For ease of exposition, all the definitions and results in this section are provided for the prior 𝝁⋆. It is straightforward to generalize them to the case of a generic
𝝁∈ 𝑐.
6

M.Bernasconi,M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesietal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104245
⨉ We represent the continuation strategies of DPs by introducing the set of continuation strategy profiles, denoted as  ∶=
𝜎=(𝐼,𝑎)∈Σ𝑟 𝑟,𝐼. A continuation strategy profile 𝝆∈, with 𝝆=(𝝆 𝜎)𝜎∈Σ𝑟, defines a strategy 𝝆 𝜎∈ 𝑟,𝐼 for every receiver’s sequence
𝜎=(𝐼, 𝑎) ∈Σ𝑟. Intuitively, 𝝆 𝜎 is the strategy for the SDM sub-problem starting from infoset 𝐼 that is used by the receiver after
deviating upon observing sequence 𝜎∈Σ𝑟. As a result, any pair (𝝎, 𝝆) ∈Ω × specifies a valid DP; formally:
Definition 1 (Deviation policy). Given a vector 𝝎∈Ωand a profile 𝝆∈, the (𝝎, 𝝆)-DPprescribes to follow sender’s recommendations
until action 𝑎is recommended at infoset 𝐼 for some sequence 𝜎=(𝐼, 𝑎)such that 𝝎[𝜎] =1; from that point on, it prescribes to play
according to strategy 𝝆 𝜎.
We denote by 𝑈𝝎→𝝆(𝝓, 𝝁⋆)the receiver’s expected utility obtained with a (𝝎, 𝝆)-DP, so that we can state the following formal
definition of persuasive signaling schemes.
Definition 2 (Persuasiveness). A signaling scheme 𝝓∈Φis 𝜖-persuasive, namely 𝝓∈Φ⋄ 𝜖(𝝁⋆), if
max 𝑈𝝎→𝝆 (𝝓,𝝁⋆ )−𝑈(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )≤𝜖. (1)
(𝝎,𝝆)∈Ω×
Moreover, a signaling scheme 𝝓∈Φis persuasive, namely 𝝓∈Φ⋄(𝝁⋆), if it is 0-persuasive.
Intuitively, the above definition states that a signaling scheme is 𝜖-persuasive if the receiver’s expected utility by following rec-
ommendations is at most 𝜖less than the one obtained by an optimal DP, which is a DP maximizing receiver’s expected utility.
Our local decomposition of DPs is based on suitably defined, simple deviation policies, which we call single-point DPs(SPDPs).
These are special cases of DPs that stop following the sender’s action recommendations only when a specific single infoset is reached
and a particular action is recommended therein. SPDPs are formally defined as follows:
Definition 3 (Single-point deviation strategy). Given a receiver’s sequence 𝜎=(𝐼, 𝑎) ∈Σ𝑟and a receiver’s strategy 𝝆 𝜎∈ 𝑟,𝐼for the SDM
sub-problem starting from infoset 𝐼, the (𝜎, 𝝆 𝜎)-SPDPprescribes to follow sender’s recommendations until action 𝑎is recommended
at infoset 𝐼; from that point on, the strategy prescribes to play according to 𝝆 𝜎.
We denote by 𝑈 𝜎→𝝆𝜎(𝝓, 𝝁⋆)the receiver’s expected utility obtained by following an (𝜎, 𝝆 𝜎)-SPDP. The following theorem provides
the key result underlying our decomposition.5 It shows that the difference between the utility achieved by a (𝝎, 𝝆)-DP and that
obtained by following recommendations can be decomposed into the sum over all the sequences 𝜎∈Σ𝑟 of analogous differences
defined for the (𝜎, 𝝆 𝜎)-SPDPs, where each difference is weighted by 𝝎[𝜎].
Theorem 1. Given a signaling scheme 𝝓∈Φand a (𝝎, 𝝆)-DP, it holds:
( )
∑
𝑈𝝎→𝝆(𝝓,𝝁⋆)−𝑈(𝝓,𝝁⋆)= 𝜎∈Σ𝑟𝝎[𝜎] 𝑈 𝜎→𝝆𝜎(𝝓,𝝁⋆)−𝑈(𝝓,𝝁⋆) .
5.2. A polytopal approximation of the set of persuasive signaling schemes
Φ⋄ 𝜖(𝝁⋆)
In the following, we show how to exploit Theorem 1 to provide an approximate characterization of the set using a
polynomially-sized polytope. First, we state a corollary of Theorem1showing that persuasiveness can be bounded by suitably defined
SPDPs. Formally, we have6:
Corollary 1. Given a signaling scheme 𝝓∈Φ, the following holds:
[ ]
∑ +
(𝝎,𝝆m )∈a Ωx ×𝑈𝝎→𝝆 (𝝓,𝝁⋆ )−𝑈(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )≤ 𝝆𝜎m ∈a x 𝑟,𝐼𝑈 𝜎→𝝆𝜎(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )−𝑈(𝝓,𝝁⋆ ) .
𝜎=(𝐼,𝑎)∈Σ𝑟
By exploiting Corollary1, we introduce the following definition of 𝜖-persuasive polytope(Lemma1justifies the term polytope), as
the set of signaling schemes for which there is no (𝜎, 𝝆 𝜎)-SPDP that achieves a receiver’s utility that exceeds by more than 𝜖∕|Σ𝑟|that
achieved by following the recommendations.
Definition 4 (Persuasive polytope). The 𝜖-persuasive polytopeis defined as:
{ }
|
Λ𝜖(𝝁⋆ )∶= 𝝓∈Φ| |𝝆𝜎m ∈a x 𝑟,𝐼𝑈 𝜎→𝝆𝜎(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )−𝑈(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )≤𝜖∕|Σ𝑟| ∀𝜎∈Σ𝑟 .
5 All the proofs are provided in AppendixB, AppendixC, AppendixD, and AppendixE.
6 Given any 𝑥 ∈ℝ, we let [𝑥]+∶=max(𝑥, 0).
7

M.Bernasconi,M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesietal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104245
Moreover, we denote by Λ(𝝁⋆)the 0-persuasive polytope.
Λ𝜖(𝝁⋆)is
As we show in the following lemma, an efficiently-representable polytope.
Λ𝜖(𝝁⋆)can
Lemma 1. The set be described using a polynomial number of linear constraints.
The following lemma shows that the 𝜖-persuasive polytope is contained in Φ⋄ 𝜖(𝝁⋆), and that the set of persuasive signaling schemes
is contained in the former. Formally:
Φ⋄(𝝁⋆) ≡Λ(𝝁⋆) ⊆Λ𝜖(𝝁⋆) ⊆Φ⋄ 𝜖(𝝁⋆).
Lemma 2. It is always the case that
Λ(𝝁⋆) Φ⋄(𝝁⋆).
Lemma2also implies that the polytope exactly characterizes the set of persuasive signaling schemes Thus, by
adding the maximization of the sender’s expected utility 𝐹(𝝓, 𝝁⋆) on top of the linear constraints describing Λ(𝝁⋆), we obtain a
polynomially-sized linear program for finding an optimal sender’s signaling scheme in any instance of the BPSDM problem in which
𝝁⋆
is known.
𝝁⋆
Theorem 2. The BPSDM problem can be solved in polynomial time when the prior is known.
6. Relation to non-sequential Bayesian persuasion
Now, we clarify the relationship between the BPSDM problem we study in this paper and the classical Bayesian persuasion
framework introduced byKamenica and Gentzkow[2]. In particular, we show that any instance of the classical Bayesian persuasion
problem can be mapped to an instance of the BPSDM problem.
A Bayesian persuasion problem instance is defined by a set of 𝑘 ∶=||actions for the receiver, a set of signals for the sender,
and a set Θ of 𝑑∶=|Θ| possible outcomes of a (single) random event (called states of nature in the classical Bayesian persuasion
terminology). The receiver’s payoff function is 𝑢R∶Θ × →[0, 1], while the sender’s one is 𝑢S∶Θ × →[0, 1]. The sender observes
the realized state of nature, which is drawn according to a commonly-known prior distribution 𝜇∈Δ . Then, they partially disclose
Θ
information about the state by committing to a signaling scheme 𝜑 ∶Θ →Δ, which is a randomized mapping from states of nature
to signals for the receiver. Thus, the interaction between the sender and the receiver is as follows.
(i) The sender commits to a publicly known signaling scheme 𝜑.
(ii) The sender observes the state of nature 𝜃∼𝜇.
(iii) The sender samples a signal 𝑠 ∼𝜑(𝜃, ⋅)and sends it to the receiver.
(iv) The receiver computes their posterior belief over the states Θ.
(v) The receiver plays an action 𝑎 ∈that maximizes their expected payoff.
The posterior beliefs that the receiver computes in step (iv) after observing a signal 𝑠 ∈ are defined by a probability distribution
𝜉 𝑠∈Δ Θsuch that:
𝜇(𝜃)𝜑(𝜃,𝑠)
𝜉 𝑠(𝜃)∶=∑ 𝜃′∈Θ𝜇(𝜃′)𝜑(𝜃′,𝑠),
and, thus, after observing signal 𝑠the receiver plays an action
∑
𝑎∈argmax 𝜉 𝑠(𝜃)𝑢𝖱 (𝜃,𝑎′).
𝑎′∈
𝜃∈Θ
A revelation-principle-style argument[2]allows the sender to focus on direct and persuasive signaling schemes, where the latter
property means that ≡, with signals corresponding to actions recommendations for the receiver. A persuasive signaling scheme
𝜑 ∶Θ →Δ is such that the receiver is always incentivized to follow action recommendations; formally:
∑ ∑
𝜇(𝜃)𝜑(𝜃,𝑎)𝑢R(𝜃,𝑎)≥ 𝜇(𝜃)𝜑(𝜃,𝑎)𝑢R(𝜃,𝑎′) ∀𝑎,𝑎′∈. (2)
𝜃∈Θ 𝜃∈Θ
Mapping between classical, non-sequential Bayesian persuasion to BPSDM Given an instance of the classical Bayesian persuasion prob-
lem[2], a corresponding (equivalent) instance of our BPSDM problem can be constructed as follows.
(1) There is a unique chance node ℎ which is the root of the tree defining the SDM problem.
0
(2) At the chance node, there are 𝑑possible outcomes (namely 𝐴(ℎ ) ≡Θ), each corresponding to a state of nature 𝜃∈Θand having
0
probability 𝜇(𝜃)of occurring, so that with a slight abuse of notation we can write 𝝁⋆[∅] =1and 𝝁⋆[𝜃] =𝜇(𝜃)for all 𝜃∈Θ.
(3) The receiver has a unique infoset 𝐼, which contains one decision node for each possible outcome at the chance node.
(4) At infoset 𝐼, the receiver has a set 𝐴(𝐼) ≡of available actions.
8

M.Bernasconi,M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesietal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104245
Fig.2.InstanceofBPSDMproblemcorrespondingtoagiveninstanceofBayesianpersuasionproblem.
(5) Terminal nodes are determined by the state of nature, receiver’s action pairs, so that each 𝜃 𝑖∈Θand 𝑎 𝑗∈define a corre-
sponding terminal node 𝑧 𝑖,𝑗 in the SDM problem.
See Fig.2for an example of the mapping. The following theorem formally states that our definition of persuasiveness (Definition2)
instantiated to the BPSDM problem instances described above is equivalent to the definition of persuasiveness for classical Bayesian
persuasion problems (Equation(2)). This establishes that our framework encompasses classical Bayesian persuasion problems as a
special case.
Theorem 3. Given any Bayesian persuasion instance, a signaling scheme is persuasive (Equation(2)) if and only if it is persuasive (Defini-
tion2) in the corresponding instance of the BPSDM problem.
Proof. It is sufficient to prove the equivalence between Equation (1) for 𝜖=0 and Equation (2) applied to the BPSDM problem
instance representing the given Bayesian persuasion instance. To do that, we employ Theorem 1 and Lemma 6 in such a BPSDM
problem instance, so that, using the notation introduced in this section, it is straightforward to see that Equation(1)reads as follows:
∑ ∑
max 𝜑(𝜃,𝑎)𝜇(𝜃)𝑢R(𝜃,𝑎′)− 𝜑(𝜃,𝑎)𝜇(𝜃)𝑢R(𝜃,𝑎)≤0 ∀𝑎∈.
𝑎′∈
𝜃∈Θ 𝜃∈Θ
By rearranging the terms, we get Equation(2), which concludes the proof. □
7. Always being persuasive is impossible: a relaxation is needed
In this section, we prove that it is impossible to design an algorithm that returns a sequence of persuasive signaling schemes for
a generic BPSDM problem.
Theorem 4 (Impossibility of persuasiveness). There exists a constant 𝛾∈(0, 1)such that no algorithm can guarantee to output a sequence
𝝓 1, … , 𝝓 𝑇 of signaling schemes such that, with probability at least 𝛾, all the signaling schemes 𝝓 𝑡are persuasive.
Notice that this result is not in contrast with the work byZu etal.[24]which provides a no-regret algorithm that outputs sequences
of signaling schemes that are guaranteed to be persuasive with high probability. Indeed, Zu etal.[24]require regularity assumptions
over the prior, while in our result the prior can be any. Theorem4motivates the introduction of a less restrictive requirement on the
signaling schemes. In particular, we look for algorithms that output signaling schemes 𝝓 1, … , 𝝓 𝑇, such that the expected utility loss
incurred by the receiver by following recommendations rather than playing an optimal DP is small. To capture such a requirement,
we introduce the following definition of (cumulative) receiver’s regret:
∑ ∑
𝑉 𝑇 ∶= 𝑡∈[𝑇] (𝝎,𝝆m )∈a Ωx ×𝑈𝝎→𝝆(𝝓 𝑡,𝝁⋆)− 𝑡∈[𝑇]𝑈(𝝓 𝑡,𝝁⋆).
Therefore our goal becomes that of designing algorithms guaranteeing that the cumulative receiver’s regret grows sub-linearly in
𝑇, namely 𝑉 𝑇 =𝑜(𝑇), while continuing to ensure that 𝑅 𝑇 =𝑜(𝑇).
In Sections8and9, we design algorithms achieving sub-linear 𝑉 𝑇 and 𝑅 𝑇 for the learning problem described in Section4. The
algorithms implement two functions: (i) SelectStrategy(), which, at each 𝑡 ∈[𝑇], draws a signaling scheme 𝝓 𝑡∈Φon the basis
of the internal state of the algorithm; and (ii) Update(𝑜 𝑡), which modifies the internal state based on the observation 𝑜 𝑡 received as
feedback. Each algorithm alternates these two functions as the interaction between the sender and the receiver unfolds as described
in Section4. Specifically, under full feedback the sender observes 𝒚 𝑡 and calls Update(𝒚 𝑡), while in the bandit feedback it observes
𝑧 𝑡and calls Update(𝑧 𝑡).
8. Learning with full feedback
In this section, we will discuss the online problem faced by the sender that wants to optimize online its utility 𝐹(𝝓, 𝝁⋆)while
𝝁⋆
learning the unknown prior . We start by providing a learning algorithm (Algorithm1) working with full feedback, i.e., when the
sender observes the realizations of allthe possible random events. The main idea of the algorithm is to choose signaling schemes 𝝓 𝑡
that belong to suitable sets Λ𝛽𝑡(𝝁̂ 𝑡)which are designed to be “close” to the set Φ⋄(𝝁⋆)of persuasive signaling schemes. At each round
9

M.Bernasconi,M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesietal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104245
Algorithm 1 Full-feedback algorithm.
functionSelectStrategy():
𝝓 𝑡←arg max 𝐹(𝝓, 𝝁̂ 𝑡)
return𝝓𝝓 𝑡∈Λ𝛽𝑡(𝝁̂𝑡)
functionUpdate(𝒚 𝑡):
∑𝑡
𝝁̂ 𝑡+1[𝜎] ← 𝒚 𝜏[𝜎]∕𝑡 ∀𝜎∈Σ𝑐
√𝜏=1
𝜖 𝑡+1← log(2𝑇 2| 𝑡Σ𝑐|∕𝛿)
𝛽 𝑡+1←2|||Σ𝑟|𝜖
𝑡+1
𝑡 ∈[𝑇], Algorithm1{defines the desired set as f}ollows. First, it maintains an estimate 𝝁̂ 𝑡 of 𝝁⋆ ; formally, it defines a radius 𝜖 𝑡 such
that the event ∶= ‖𝝁̂ 𝑡−𝝁⋆‖ ∞≤𝜖 𝑡 ∀𝑡∈[𝑇] holds with probability at least 1 −𝛿. Second, it defines a parameter 𝛽 𝑡 such that,
conditionally to the realization of the event , the following two conditions hold: (i) the decision space Λ𝛽𝑡(𝝁̂ 𝑡)contains the optimal
signaling scheme 𝝓⋆ ; (ii) Λ 2𝛽𝑡(𝝁⋆)contains the signaling scheme 𝝓 𝑡. Intuitively, the first condition is needed to have a low sender’s
regret, while the second one yields approximately persuasive signaling schemes.7
The polytopal approximation that we provide in Section5.2plays a crucial role in the complexity of Algorithm1. Specifically, it
a sell to Λw 𝛽s (i 𝝁̂t t 𝑡)o os ve ele rc Φt t ⋄ 𝛽h 𝑡(e 𝝁̂ d 𝑡)es ii sr e nd e c𝝓 es𝑡 si an r yp o dl uy en o tom ti hal e t fi am ce t tb hy a to p thti em laiz ti tn eg r io sv ne or t th kne os wet n Λ t𝛽 o𝑡 ( a𝝁̂ d𝑡 m), iw t ah nic eh ffi ca cn ie b ne t rd eo pn re e se effi ntc ai te in ontl .y F. oT rh me au ls lye : of the
𝑡
Theorem 5. Given any 𝛿∈(0, 1), with probability at least 1 −𝛿, Algorithm1guarantees:
( √ ) ( √ )
( ) ( )
𝑅 = || 𝑇log 𝑇|Σ𝑐|∕𝛿 , 𝑉 = |Σ𝑟||| 𝑇log 𝑇|Σ𝑐|∕𝛿 .
𝑇 𝑇
Moreover, the algorithm runs in polynomial time.
9. Learning with bandit feedback
Algorithm 2 Bandit-feedback algorithm.
functionSelectStrategy():
if𝑡 ≤𝑁then ⊳First Phase
𝜎 Σ𝑠= ∋(ℎ 𝜎, 𝑎 ←) ← 𝑠a (ℎrg )min𝜎∈Σ𝑐𝐶 𝑡[𝜎]
′ 𝜎
Choose 𝝓 𝑡∈Φ ∶𝝓 𝑡[𝜎′] =1
else ⊳Second Phase
𝝓 𝑡←arg 𝝓∈Λm 𝛽𝑁ax (𝝁̂𝑁)𝝁m ∈a 𝑡x (𝛿)𝐹(𝝓, 𝝁)
return𝝓
𝑡
functionUpdate(𝑧 𝑡):
Build path 𝒑 𝑡∈{0, 1}|Σ𝑐|from 𝜎 𝑐(𝑧 𝑡)
Sample 𝝅 𝑡∼𝝓 𝑡s.t. 𝒑 𝑡[𝜎] =1 ⇒𝜎∈Σ↓(𝝅 𝑡)
for𝜎∈Σ𝑐do
if𝜎∈Σ↓(𝝅 𝑡))then
[𝜎] ←[𝜎] ∪{𝑡}
𝝁𝐶 𝑡𝑡 ++ 11 [[ 𝜎𝜎 ]] ←← √| 𝐶 𝑡+1[ 1𝜎 [𝜎] ]| 𝜏∈∑
̂ [𝜎]𝒑 𝜏[𝜎]
𝑡+1𝜖 (𝑡 𝛿+ )1 [ ←𝜎] {← 𝝁| √𝝁lo [g 𝜎2(4 𝐶 ]𝑇 𝑡+ −| 1Σ [𝑐 𝜎 𝝁̂| ]∕ 𝑡𝛿 +) 𝑡+1[𝜎]∀𝜎∈Σ𝑐}
 | || 1[𝜎]|≤𝜖
𝛽 𝑡+1←2|||Σ𝑐| |Σ𝑐|lo 2g (( 𝑡4 +𝑇 1| )Σ𝑐|∕𝛿)
In this section, we build on Algorithm1to deal with bandit feedback, i.e., when at each round 𝑡 ∈[𝑇]the sender only observes the
terminal node 𝑧 𝑡reached at the end of the SDM problem. The main difficulties of such a setting can be summarized by the following
observations. First, the feedback 𝑧 𝑡only reveals partial information about the prior, and such information also depends on the selected
signaling scheme 𝝓 𝑡. Second, even if the sender plays a signaling scheme 𝝓∈Φfor an arbitrarily large number of rounds, there is
no guarantee that they collect enough information to tell whether 𝝓∈Φ⋄ 𝜖(𝝁⋆)or notfor some 𝜖>0. Indeed, the persuasiveness of
a signaling scheme depends on allreceiver’s utilities in the SDM problem, and some parts of the tree may not be reached during a
7 See Lemmas9and10in AppendixDfor the formal statements of these properties.
10

M.Bernasconi,M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesietal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104245
sufficiently large number of rounds by committing to 𝝓. Thus, any algorithm for the bandit-feedback setting must guarantee a suitable
level of exploration over the entire tree, so as to keep track of the entity of the violation of persuasiveness constraints.
We design a two-phase algorithm, whose pseudo-code is provided in Algorithm 2. The algorithm takes as input the number
𝑁∈[𝑇]of rounds devoted to the first phaseguaranteeing the necessary amount of exploration, as detailed in Section9.1. During this
phase, the SelectStrategy()procedure implements an efficient deterministic uniform exploration policy, which builds an unbiased
estimator 𝝁̂ 𝑁 of 𝝁⋆ . This allows us to restrict the space of feasible signaling schemes used in the subsequent phase to those that are
approximately persuasive, i.e., those in the set Λ𝛽𝑁(𝝁̂ 𝑁). In Section9.2, we discuss the second phaseof the algorithm, composed by
the rounds 𝑡 >𝑁, during which the algorithm focuses on the minimization of sender’s regret by exploiting the optimism in face of
uncertaintyprinciple. Finally, in Section9.3, we provide a lower bound on the trade-off between the sender’s and receiver’s regrets,
matching the upper bounds achieved by Algorithm2for a large portion of the trade-off frontier. This result formally motivates the
necessity of the uniform exploration which is performed in the first phase of the algorithm.
9.1. Minimizing the receiver’s regret
At each round 𝑡 ∈[𝑇], the sender observes a terminal node 𝑧 𝑡∈that uniquely determines a path in the tree defining the SDM
problem. We encode such a path using a vector 𝒑 𝑡∈{0, 1}|Σ𝑐| such that 𝒑 𝑡[𝜎] =1if and only if the chance sequence 𝜎∈Σ𝑐 lies on
the path from the root of the tree to 𝑧 𝑡, namely 𝜎⪯𝜎 𝑐(𝑧 𝑡). If the sender commits to a signaling scheme 𝝓 𝑡∈Φ, then it is easy to see
that, for every 𝜎=(ℎ, 𝑎) ∈Σ𝑐, the element 𝒑 𝑡[𝜎]is distributed as a Bernoulli of parameter 𝝓 𝑡[𝜎 𝑠(ℎ)]𝝁⋆[𝜎]. The crucial observation
behind the design of our estimator is that, if the sender commits to a deterministic signaling scheme 𝝅 𝑡∈Πat some round 𝑡 ∈[𝑇],
then for all the chance sequences 𝜎∈Σ𝑐 that are compatiblewith 𝝅 𝑡, i.e., that can be observed when 𝝅 𝑡is played, we have that 𝒑 𝑡[𝜎]
is distributed as a Bernoulli of parameter 𝝁⋆[𝜎]. Formally, a sequence 𝜎∈Σ𝑐 is compatible with 𝝅 𝑡 if there exists a chance node
ℎ ∈ 𝑐 and an outcome 𝑎 ∈𝐴(ℎ)satisfying 𝜎=(ℎ, 𝑎)and 𝝅 𝑡[𝜎 𝑠(ℎ)] =1. This observation leads to the following result:
Lemma 3. For every deterministic signaling scheme 𝝅∈Π, let
{ }
Σ↓(𝝅)∶= 𝜎=(ℎ,𝑎)∈Σ𝑐∣𝑎∈𝐴(ℎ)∧𝝅[𝜎 𝑠(ℎ)]=1 .
[ ]
It holds 𝔼 𝒑 𝑡[𝜎]|𝝅 𝑡=𝝅 =𝝁⋆[𝜎]for every 𝝅∈Πand 𝜎∈Σ↓(𝝅).
Notice that, since in the rounds 𝑡 ≤𝑁, we only employ deterministic strategies we have that 𝔼[𝒑 𝑡[𝜎]] =𝜇⋆[𝜎], where the expecta-
tion is only of the random chance events. Thus, during the first phase, Algorithm2builds the desired estimator 𝝁̂ 𝑁 of 𝝁⋆ as follows.
At each round 𝑡 ≤𝑁, after observing the feedback 𝑧 𝑡, the algorithm samples a deterministic signaling scheme 𝝅 𝑡∈Πaccording to 𝝓 𝑡
(the one selected at 𝑡), so that all the sequences 𝜎∈Σ𝑐 such that 𝒑 𝑡[𝜎] =1(or, equivalently, 𝜎⪯𝜎 𝑐(𝑧 𝑡)) belong to Σ↓(𝝅 𝑡).8Then, for
every 𝜎∈Σ↓(𝝅 𝑡), the algorithm updates the estimator component 𝝁̂ 𝑡[𝜎]according to 𝒑 𝑡[𝜎]. Since the probability of visiting a sequence
𝜎∈Σ𝑐 depends on 𝝓 𝑡 (and, thus, can be arbitrarily small), the first 𝑁 rounds must be carefully used to ensure that each sequence
is explored at least 𝑁∕|Σ𝑐|times. To explore a specific sequence 𝜎∈Σ𝑐, we choose a signaling scheme 𝝓 𝑡 such that 𝜎∈Σ↓(𝝅 𝑡)for
every deterministic 𝝅 𝑡∼𝝓 𝑡. The procedure described above is needed for minimizing the receiver’s regret, since, in the second phase,
the algorithm selects signaling schemes 𝝓 𝑡 from Λ𝛽𝑁(𝝁̂ 𝑁). In particular, as shown by the following lemma, Algorithm2guarantees
that the receiver’s regret is upper bounded by 2𝛽 𝑁 at each round 𝑡 >𝑁, since it defines 𝜖 𝑡[𝜎]for each sequence 𝜎∈Σ𝑐 so that the
event ̃ ∶={|𝝁⋆[𝜎]−𝝁̂ 𝑡[𝜎]|≤𝜖 𝑡[𝜎]∀(𝑡,𝜎)∈[𝑇]×Σ𝑐}holds with probability at least 1 −𝛿∕2.
Lemma 4. Under the event ̃ , Algorithm2guarantees that 𝝓 𝑡∈Λ 2𝛽𝑁(𝝁⋆)at each round 𝑡 >𝑁.
9.2. Minimizing the sender’s regret
𝝓⋆
Algorithm2also needs to guarantee a small sender’s regret. To do so, we would like that is a valid pick for the algorithm,
i.e., it belongs to Λ𝛽𝑁(𝝁̂ 𝑡). However, differently from the full-feedback setting, stopping exploration after the first 𝑁 round does not
guarantee optimal rates. To fix this issue, in the second phase, the algorithm selects 𝝓 𝑡 optimistically by maximizing the sender’s
expected utility 𝐹(𝝓, 𝝁)over both 𝝓∈Λ𝛽𝑁(𝝁̂ 𝑁)and 𝝁∈ 𝑡(𝛿), where  𝑡(𝛿)is a suitably-defined confidence set centered around 𝝁̂ 𝑡
such that {𝝁⋆∈ 𝑡(𝛿)} ≡̃ , and, thus, it holds with high probability. This guarantees that max𝝁∈𝑡(𝛿)𝐹(𝝓⋆, 𝝁) ≥𝐹(𝝓⋆, 𝝁⋆). Formally:
Lemma 5. If the event ̃ holds, then, for every round 𝑡 >𝑁, it holds that 𝝓⋆ ∈Λ𝛽𝑁(𝝁̂ 𝑡)and max𝝁∈𝑡(𝛿)𝐹(𝝓⋆, 𝝁) ≥𝐹(𝝓⋆, 𝝁⋆).
Thus, 𝐹(𝝓 𝑡, 𝝁⋆) ≈𝐹(𝝓 𝑡, 𝝁̂ 𝑡) ≥max𝝁∈𝑡(𝛿)𝐹(𝝓⋆, 𝝁̂) ≥𝐹(𝝓⋆, 𝝁⋆)holds in the limit, implying that 𝐹(𝝓 𝑡, 𝝁⋆)converges to 𝐹(𝝓⋆, 𝝁⋆)
after sufficiently many rounds. Formally:
8 The sampling of 𝝅 𝑡∈Πaccording to 𝝓 𝑡can be done efficiently by a straightforward modification of the recursive procedure in[40,41].
11

M.Bernasconi,M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesietal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104245
Fig.3.Trade-off between 𝑅 𝑇 and 𝑉 𝑇 in the bandit feedback. (For interpretation of the colors in the figure(s), the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Theorem 6. Given any 𝛿∈(0, 1)and 𝑁∈[𝑇], Algorithm2guarantees:
√ √
⎛ ( ) ⎞ ⎛ ( ) ⎞
𝑇| 𝛿Σ𝑐| 𝑇| 𝛿Σ𝑐| |Σ 𝑁𝑐|
𝑅 𝑇 =⎜ ⎜𝑁+ log |Σ𝑐|𝑇⎟ ⎟,𝑉 𝑇 =⎜ ⎜𝑁+𝑇|||Σ𝑟| log ⎟ ⎟,
⎝ ⎠ ⎝ ⎠
with probability at least 1 −𝛿. Moreover, the algorithm runs in polynomial time.
In contrast to the case with full feedback, the optimization problem solved by Algorithm2belongs to the class of bilinear problems,
which areNP-hard in general[42]. However, in Theorem6we prove that our specific problem can be solved in polynomial time.
Furthermore, notice that Theorem6takes as input the number 𝑁of rounds devoted to the first phase. Given an 𝛼≥1∕2, by choosing
any 𝑁=⌊𝑇𝛼⌋we get bounds of 𝑅 𝑇 =̃ (𝑇𝛼)and 𝑉 𝑇 =̃ (𝑇max{𝛼,1−𝛼 2}).
9.3. The lower bound frontier
We conclude by showing that the trade-offs between 𝑉 𝑇 and 𝑅 𝑇 achieved by Algorithm2are essentially tight. Previously, we
provided an intuition as to why the algorithm needs to uniformly explore the entire tree of the SDM problem. Here, we provide a
lower bound that corroborates such a statement. In particular, the following theorem shows that, for any 𝛼∈[1∕2, 1], to guarantee
(𝑇𝛼), Ω(𝑇1−𝛼∕2).9
a sender’s regret of the order of it is necessary to suffer a receiver’s regret of the order of
Theorem 7. For any 𝛼∈[1∕2, 1], there exists a constant 𝛾∈(0, 1)such that no algorithm guarantees both 𝑅 𝑇 =𝑜(𝑇𝛼)and 𝑉 𝑇 =𝑜(𝑇1−𝛼∕2)
with probability greater than 𝛾.
Fig.3shows on the horizontal axis the order of the 𝑇 term in 𝑅 𝑇, while, on the vertical axis, it shows the order of the 𝑇 in 𝑉 𝑇.
The shaded area over the blue line shows the achievable trade-offs, while the marked red line shows the performances proved in
Theorem6. Thus, we show that Algorithm2matches the lower bound for 𝛼∈[1∕2, 2∕3]. However, when 𝛼∈[2∕3, 1], the guarantees
proved in Theorem6diverge from the ones proved in the lower bound. This is due to the 𝑁=⌊ √𝑇𝛼⌋component in the receiver’s regret
that becomes dominant when 𝛼≥2∕3. We conjecture that it is possible to reduce this term to 𝑁, hence matching the lower bound
of Theorem7. The reason for such a gap between the lower and upper bounds is that, during the first phase, Algorithm2utilizes
signaling schemes without taking into account their persuasiveness, thus incurring in large receiver’s regret during the first steps.
We leave addressing the question of whether it is possible to design exploration strategies by only using approximately-persuasive
signaling schemes as future work.
10. Conclusions and future work
In this paper, we address the complex information design problem encountered by an informed sender seeking to influence the
behavior of a self-interested receiver through the provision of payoff-relevant information in a sequential game. Our focus is on
scenarios where the prior is unknown and needs to be learned online. Previous research in the state-of-the-art has explored specific
structures over the prior that enable the design of persuasive no-regret algorithms. However, we prove that when the prior can vary
freely, disregarding the prior entirely renders it impossible to guarantee the property of persuasiveness. This finding holds even in non-
sequential games. To deal with any prior distribution, we introduce a relaxation of the persuasiveness concept. Specifically, we require
that the cumulative violation of the persuasiveness constraint of the receiver grows at a sublinear rate. We present two algorithms
√
9 For 𝛼≤1∕2, a simple reduction from a standard multi-armed bandit problem provides a lower bound of Ω( 𝑇)on both sender’s regret 𝑅 𝑇 and receiver’s regret
𝑉 𝑇.
12

M.Bernasconi,M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesietal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104245
tailored to the full√-feedback and bandit-feedback settings, respectively. More precisely, in the full-feedback setting, we provide an
algorithm with 𝑂̃ ( 𝑇)regret for both the sender and the receiver, and, in the bandit-feedback setting, we design an algorithm that,
given an 𝛼∈[1∕2, 1]as input, guarantees 𝑂̃ (𝑇𝛼)and 𝑂̃ (𝑇max{𝛼,1−𝛼 2})regrets, for the sender and the receiver respectively. We also
provide a lower bound showing that such a regret trade-off is tight for 𝛼∈[1∕2, 2∕3].
In the future, we will investigate the tightness of our bounds for 𝛼∈(2∕3, 1]. In particular, we conjecture that our lower bound
is tight and therefore that the problem admits an algorithm with a regret upper bound better than the algorithm we provide in this
paper, for specific values of the trade off between the regret of the sender and the receiver. We will also investigate extensions of our
model where, e.g., the number of receivers is larger than one.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Martino Bernasconi:Investigation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.Matteo Castiglioni:Investigation, Writ-
ing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.Alberto Marchesi:Investigation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.
Nicola Gatti:Supervision, Funding acquisition.Francesco Trovò:Supervision.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Italian MIUR PRIN 2022 Project “Targeted Learning Dynamics: Computing Efficient and Fair Equi-
libria through No-Regret Algorithms”, by the FAIR (Future Artificial Intelligence Research) project, funded by the NextGenerationEU
program within the PNRR-PE-AI scheme (M4C2, Investment 1.3, Line on Artificial Intelligence), and by the EU Horizon project ELIAS
(European Lighthouse of AI for Sustainability, No. 101120237).
AppendixA. Notation table
Symbol Description
SequentialDecisionMaking
, 𝑑, 𝑐 Terminal, decision and chance nodes, respectively.
∶=∪ 𝑑∪ 𝑐 Tree nodes.
𝑢(𝑧) Agent’s utility at leaf 𝑧 ∈
𝑓(𝑧) Sender’s utility at leaf 𝑧 ∈
 Receiver’s infosets
𝐴(𝐼) Actions from infoset 𝐼∈
Σ𝑟 Set of receiver’s sequences
 𝑟 Set of receiver’s sequence form strategies
 𝑟,𝐼 Set of receiver’s sequence form strategies from infoset 𝐼∈
BayesianPersuasioninSequentialDecisionMaking
Φ Set of sender’s signaling schemes
Φ⋄ 𝜖(𝝁⋆) 𝜖-persuasive signaling schemes w.r.t.prior 𝝁⋆
𝑈(𝝓,𝝁⋆) Receiver’s utility of following the signaling scheme 𝝓
𝐹(𝝓,𝝁⋆) Sender’s utility of following the signaling scheme 𝝓
Ω Receiver’s deviation points
 Set of receiver’s continuation policies
𝑈𝝎→𝝆(𝝓,𝝁⋆) Receiver’s utility of (𝝎, 𝝆)deviation policy, for (𝝎, 𝝆) ∈Ω ×
𝑈 𝜎→𝝆𝜎(𝝓,𝝁⋆) R 𝜎e =ce (i 𝐼v ,e 𝑎r )’ s u Σti 𝑟li aty do f ( 𝜎𝜎 ∈, 𝝆 𝜎) 𝑟,𝐼single point deviation policy, for
∈ n 𝝆
Λ𝜖(𝝁⋆) 𝜖-persuasive polytope
Fig.A.4.Summaryofnotation.
AppendixB. Proofs omitted from Section5
Let us remark that all the results in Section5can be straightforwardly generalized to the case of a generic 𝝁∈ 𝑐, as needed for
𝝁⋆
the proofs of the results in Sections8and9. For ease of exposition, we state and prove the results of Section5for the prior .
First, we prove a preliminary lemma that allows us to express the receiver’s expected utility difference between using a (𝜎, 𝝆 𝜎)-
SPDP and following action recommendations by only considering the terminal nodes under the infoset in which the SPDP prescribed
to deviate. A similar result for the case of correlated strategies can be found in[43, AppendixA].
13

M.Bernasconi,M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesietal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104245
Lemma 6. Given 𝝓∈Φ, for every (𝜎, 𝝆 𝜎)-SPDP with 𝜎=(𝐼, 𝑎) ∈Σ𝑟and 𝝆 𝜎∈ 𝑟,𝐼, it holds:
∑
𝑈 𝜎→𝝆𝜎(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )−𝑈(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )= 𝝓[(ℎ 𝐼(𝑧),𝑎)]𝝆 𝜎[𝜎 𝑟(𝑧)]𝝁⋆ [𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]𝑢(𝑧)
𝑧∈𝑍(𝐼)
∑
− 𝝓[𝜎 𝑠(𝑧)]𝝁⋆ [𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]𝑢(𝑧).
𝑧∈𝑍(𝜎)
Proof. We define the following three disjoint events for any (𝜎, 𝝆 𝜎)-SPDP, where 𝜎=(𝐼, 𝑎).
(C1): A terminal node 𝑧 ∈(𝜎)is reached.
(C2): A terminal node 𝑧 ∈(𝐼, 𝑎′)for some 𝑎′≠𝑎 ∈𝐴(𝐼)is reached.
(C3): A terminal node 𝑧 ∈∕(𝐼)is reached.
Next, under each event, we define the probability 𝑝 𝜎→𝝆𝜎(𝑧)of reaching a terminal node 𝑧:
(C1): Since 𝑧 ∈(𝜎), the node 𝑧is reached by means of the continuation strategy 𝝆 𝜎. Thus:
𝑝( 𝜎1 →) 𝝆𝜎(𝑧)∶=𝝓[(ℎ 𝐼(𝑧),𝑎)]𝝁⋆ [𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]𝝆 𝜎[𝜎 𝑟(𝑧)].
(C2): Since 𝑧 ∈(𝐼, 𝑎′)for 𝑎′≠𝑎 ∈𝐴(𝐼), the node 𝑧can be reached either by deviating and then committing to the continuation
strategy 𝝆 𝜎 or by following recommendations. Moreover, these two cases are exclusive, and, thus, we can write:
𝑝( 𝜎2 →) 𝝆𝜎(𝑧)∶=𝝓[(ℎ 𝐼(𝑧),𝑎)]𝝁⋆ [𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]𝝆 𝜎[𝜎 𝑟(𝑧)]+𝝓[𝜎 𝑠(𝑧)]𝝁⋆ [𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)].
(C3): Since 𝑧 ∈∕(𝐼), the node 𝑧is reached by following recommendations:
𝑝( 𝜎3 →) 𝝆𝜎(𝑧)∶=𝝓[𝜎 𝑠(𝑧)]𝝁⋆ [𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)].
We observe that 𝑝( 𝜎2 →) 𝝆𝜎(𝑧) =𝑝( 𝜎1 →) 𝝆𝜎(𝑧) +𝑝( 𝜎3 →) 𝝆𝜎(𝑧), and, thus, we can write 𝑈 𝜎→𝝆𝜎(𝝓, 𝝁⋆)as:
∑ ∑ ∑
𝑈 𝜎→𝝆𝜎(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )∶= 𝑝( 𝜎1 →) 𝝆𝜎(𝑧)𝑢(𝑧)+ 𝑝( 𝜎2 →) 𝝆𝜎(𝑧)𝑢(𝑧)+ 𝑝( 𝜎3 →) 𝝆𝜎(𝑧)𝑢(𝑧)
𝑧∈(𝜎) 𝑧∈(𝐼,𝑎′)∶ 𝑧∈∕(𝐼)
𝑎′≠𝑎∈𝐴(𝐼)
∑ ∑
≤ 𝑝(1) (𝑧)𝑢(𝑧)+ 𝑝(3) (𝑧)𝑢(𝑧).
𝜎→𝝆𝜎 𝜎→𝝆𝜎
𝑧∈(𝐼) 𝑧∈∕(𝜎)
∑
Furthermore, by using the definition of 𝑝( 𝜎3 →) 𝝆𝜎(𝑧), we can write 𝑈(𝝓, 𝝁) ∶= 𝑧∈𝑢(𝑧)𝑝( 𝜎3 →) 𝝆𝜎(𝑧). Thus:
∑ ∑
𝑈 𝜎→𝝆𝜎(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )−𝑈(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )= 𝑝( 𝜎1 →) 𝝆𝜎(𝑧)𝑢(𝑧)− 𝑝( 𝜎3 →) 𝝆𝜎(𝑧)𝑢(𝑧),
𝑧∈(𝐼) 𝑧∈(𝜎)
which is the statement of the lemma by substituting the definitions of 𝑝( 𝜎1 →) 𝝆𝜎(𝑧)and 𝑝( 𝜎3 →) 𝝆𝜎(𝑧). □
Now, we exploit Lemma6to prove the following local decomposition of a DP into SPDPs.
Theorem 1. Given a signaling scheme 𝝓∈Φand a (𝝎, 𝝆)-DP, it holds:
( )
∑
𝑈𝝎→𝝆(𝝓,𝝁⋆)−𝑈(𝝓,𝝁⋆)= 𝜎∈Σ𝑟𝝎[𝜎] 𝑈 𝜎→𝝆𝜎(𝝓,𝝁⋆)−𝑈(𝝓,𝝁⋆) .
Proof. For any terminal node 𝑧 ∈, let 𝑝𝝎→𝝆(𝑧; 𝝓, 𝝁⋆)be the probability of reaching node 𝑧when the receiver employs the (𝝎, 𝝆)-DP
under the signaling scheme 𝝓and the prior 𝝁⋆ . It holds:
∑
𝑝𝝎→𝝆 (𝑧;𝝓,𝝁⋆ )∶= 𝝎[𝜎]𝝓[(ℎ 𝐼(𝑧),𝑎)]𝝆 𝜎[𝜎 𝑟(𝑧)]𝝁⋆ [𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]
𝜎=(𝐼,𝑎)∈Σ𝑟∶𝜎⪯𝜎𝑟(𝑧)
( )
∑
+𝝓[𝜎 𝑠(𝑧)]𝝁⋆ [𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)] 1− 𝝎[𝜎] .
𝜎∈Σ𝑟∶𝜎⪯𝜎𝑟(𝑧)
The sum in the first term in the definition of 𝑝𝝎→𝝆(𝑧; 𝝓, 𝝁⋆)accounts for the probabilities of reaching 𝑧when the receiver reaches
infoset 𝐼, is recommended to play action 𝑎, and deviates by following the continuation strategy 𝝆 𝜎 thereafter, for all the sequences
𝜎=(𝐼, 𝑎)that precede the sequence 𝜎 𝑟(𝑧)reaching 𝑧. Instead, the second term∑ in the definition of 𝑝𝝎→𝝆(𝑧; 𝝓, 𝝁⋆)accounts for the
probability of reaching 𝑧by following recommendations. Thus, 𝑈𝝎→𝝆(𝝓, 𝝁⋆) = 𝑧∈𝑍𝑝𝝎→𝝆(𝑧; 𝝓, 𝝁⋆)𝑢(𝑧).
14

M.Bernasconi,M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesietal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104245
𝑈𝝎→𝝆(𝝓, 𝝁⋆),
By rearranging the terms in we get to the following result:
[
∑ ∑
𝑈𝝎→𝝆 (𝝓,𝝁⋆ )=𝑈(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )+ 𝝎[𝜎]𝝓[(ℎ 𝐼(𝑧),𝑎)]𝝆 𝜎[𝜎 𝑟(𝑧)]𝝁⋆ [𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]𝑢(𝑧)
𝑧∈ 𝜎=(𝐼,𝑎)∶𝜎⪯𝜎𝑟(𝑧)
]
∑
− 𝝎[𝜎]𝝓[𝜎 𝑠(𝑧)]𝝁⋆ [𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]𝑢(𝑧)
𝜎∈Σ𝑟∶𝜎⪯𝜎𝑟(𝑧)
∑ ∑
=𝑈(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )− 𝝎[𝜎] 𝝓[𝜎 𝑠(𝑧)]𝝁⋆ [𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]𝑢(𝑧)
∑ 𝜎∈Σ ∑𝑟 𝑧∈(𝜎)
+ 𝝎[𝜎] 𝝓[(ℎ 𝐼(𝑧),𝑎)]𝝆 𝜎[𝜎 𝑟(𝑧)]𝝁⋆ [𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]𝑢(𝑧). (B.1)
𝜎∈Σ𝑟 𝑧∈(𝐼)
Thus, by combining Lemma6with Equation(B.1)we get that:
∑ [ ]
𝑈𝝎→𝝆 (𝝓,𝝁⋆ )−𝑈(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )= 𝝎[𝜎] 𝑈 𝜎→𝝆𝜎(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )−𝑈(𝝓,𝝁⋆ ) ,
𝜎∈Σ𝑟
which concludes the proof. □
Corollary 1. Given a signaling scheme 𝝓∈Φ, the following holds:
[ ]
∑ +
(𝝎,𝝆m )∈a Ωx ×𝑈𝝎→𝝆 (𝝓,𝝁⋆ )−𝑈(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )≤ 𝝆𝜎m ∈a x 𝑟,𝐼𝑈 𝜎→𝝆𝜎(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )−𝑈(𝝓,𝝁⋆ ) .
𝜎=(𝐼,𝑎)∈Σ𝑟
Proof. By using Theorem1, we derive the following:
∑ ( )
(𝝎,𝝆m )∈a Ωx ×𝑈𝝎→𝝆 (𝝓,𝝁⋆ )−𝑈(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )= (𝝎,𝝆m )∈a Ωx 𝜎∈Σ𝑟𝝎[𝜎] 𝑈 𝜎→𝝆𝜎(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )−𝑈(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )
×
∑ [ ]
≤ (𝝎,𝝆m )∈a Ωx 𝜎∈Σ𝑟𝝎[𝜎] 𝑈 𝜎→𝝆𝜎(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )−𝑈(𝝓,𝝁⋆ ) +
×
∑ [ ]
≤m 𝝆∈a x 𝑈 𝜎→𝝆𝜎(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )−𝑈(𝝓,𝝁⋆ ) +
𝜎∈Σ𝑟
[ ]
∑ +
= 𝝆𝜎m ∈a x 𝑟,𝐼𝑈 𝜎→𝝆𝜎(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )−𝑈(𝝓,𝝁⋆ ) .
𝜎∈Σ𝑟
This concludes the proof. □
Λ𝜖(𝝁⋆)can
Lemma 1. The set be described using a polynomial number of linear constraints.
Λ𝜖(𝝁⋆)can
Proof. In order to prove that the set be described by means of linear constraints, we employ duality arguments related
to the maxproblem in the definition of Λ𝜖(𝝁⋆)(Definition4).
By Lemma6, for every sequence 𝜎=(𝐼, 𝑎) ∈Σ𝑟, we can rewrite the expression in the left-hand side of the inequality characterizing
Λ𝜖(𝝁⋆)in
Definition4as follows:
{ }
∑ ∑
max 𝝓[(ℎ 𝐼(𝑧),𝑎)]𝝆 𝜎[𝜎 𝑟(𝑧)]𝝁⋆ [𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]𝑢(𝑧) − 𝝓[𝜎 𝑠(𝑧)]𝝁⋆ [𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]𝑢(𝑧),
𝝆𝜎∈𝑟,𝐼
𝑧∈𝑍(𝐼) 𝑧∈𝑍(𝜎)
so that Λ𝜖(𝝁⋆)can be expressed as the set of all 𝝓∈Φsuch that the above expression has value less than or equal to 𝜖∕|Σ𝑟|for every
𝜎∈Σ𝑟. Observe that the expression in the maxoperator is a linear function of 𝝆 𝜎, and that the set  𝑟,𝐼 is a polytope by definition.
Thus, for every 𝜎=(𝐼, 𝑎) ∈Σ𝑟, the maximization above can be equivalently rewritten as the following linear program:
( )
𝒙𝐼,𝑎 ⊤ 𝒄(𝝓,𝝁⋆
max ) s.t. (B.2a)
𝒙𝐼,𝑎≥𝟎
𝑭 𝐼𝒙𝐼,𝑎 =𝒇 𝐼 (B.2b)
where 𝒙𝐼,𝑎 is a vector of variables indexed over sequences Σ𝑟,𝐼∪{𝜎 𝑟(𝐼)}. Notice that 𝑐(𝝓, 𝝁⋆) ∈ℝ|Σ𝑟,𝐼| is a vector of coefficients such
that the component corresponding to each 𝜎′∈Σ𝑟,𝐼 is
∑
𝑐(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )[𝜎′]∶= 𝝓[(ℎ 𝐼(𝑧),𝑎)]𝝁⋆ [𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]𝑢(𝑧),
𝑧∈(𝐼)∶𝜎𝑟(𝑧)=𝜎′
15

M.Bernasconi,M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesietal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104245
while 𝑐(𝝓, 𝝁⋆)[𝜎 𝑟(𝐼)] ∶=0. Moreover, 𝑭 𝐼 ∈{−1, 0, 1}(1+|𝐶(𝐼)|)×|Σ𝑟,𝐼| is a matrix of coefficients whose components are defined as
follows: [𝑭 𝐼]𝐼 ∅,𝜎𝑟(𝐼)∶=1and [𝑭 𝐼]𝐼 ∅,𝜎′∶=0for all sequences 𝜎′∈Σ𝑟,𝐼, where 𝐼 ∅is a fictitious infoset indexing the first row, while,
for every infoset 𝐽∈𝐶(𝐼)following 𝐼 (this included) and sequence 𝜎′∈Σ𝑟,𝐼∪{𝜎 𝑟(𝐼)}:
⎧ ⎪−1 if 𝜎′=𝜎 𝑟(𝐽)
[𝑭 𝐼]𝐽,𝜎′∶=⎨1 if 𝜎′=(𝐽,𝑎′)forsome𝑎′∈𝐴(𝐽).
⎪
⎩0 otherwise
Finally, 𝒇 𝐼 ∈{0, 1}1+|𝐶(𝐼)| is a vector whose components are all zero apart from that one corresponding to the sequence 𝜎 𝑟(𝐼),
which is one (see also[39]).
The dual linear program of Problem(B.2)reads as:
min𝒚𝐼,𝑎 [𝐼 ] s.t. (B.3a)
𝒚𝐼,𝑎 ∅
𝑭⊤ 𝐼𝒚𝐼,𝑎≥𝒄(𝝓,𝝁⋆ ), (B.3b)
where 𝒚𝐼,𝑎 is a vector of dual variables indexed over 𝐶(𝐼) ∪{𝐼 ∅}. For ease of notation, we let OPT𝐼,𝑎 be the optimal value of
Problem(B.3)instantiated for the sequence 𝜎=(𝐼, 𝑎).
By strong duality, we have that the optimal value of the primal (Problem(B.2)) is equal to the optimal value of the dual (Prob-
Λ𝜖(𝝁⋆)as
lem(B.3)), and this allows us to readily rewrite the set follows:
{ }
| ∑ 𝜖
Λ𝜖(𝝁⋆ )= 𝝓∈Φ| |OPT𝐼,𝑎− 𝑧∈𝑍(𝜎)𝝓[𝜎 𝑠(𝑧)]𝝁⋆ [𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]𝑢(𝑧)≤ ∀𝜎=(𝐼,𝑎)∈Σ𝑟 . (B.4)
|Σ𝑟|
Moreover, we can remove OPT𝐼,𝑎in Equation(B.4)since it appears inthe right-hand side of a ≤inequality and Problem(B.3)is
a minproblem. Thus, the set Λ𝜖(𝝁⋆)can be written as follows:
{
| ∑ 𝜖
Λ𝜖(𝝁⋆ )= 𝝓∈Φ| |∃𝒚𝐼,𝑎 ∈ℝ1+|𝐶(𝐼)| ∶𝒚𝐼,𝑎 [𝐼 ∅]− 𝑧∈𝑍(𝜎)𝝓[𝜎 𝑠(𝑧)]𝝁⋆ [𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]𝑢(𝑧)≤
|Σ𝑟|
}
∧𝑭⊤ 𝐼𝒚𝐼,𝑎≥𝒄(𝝓,𝝁⋆ ) ∀𝜎=(𝐼,𝑎)∈Σ𝑟 , (B.5)
which is comprised of a polynomial number of inequalities and variables, concluding the proof.
Let us also notice that, by expanding the constraints of Problem(B.3), one can easily check that they can be equivalently rewritten
recursively, as follows. For every sequence 𝜎′=(𝐽, 𝑎′) ∈Σ𝑟,𝐼, Constraints(B.3b)can be rewritten as:
∑ ∑
𝒚𝐼,𝑎 [𝐽]≥ 𝝓[(ℎ 𝐼(𝑧),𝑎)]𝝁⋆ [𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]𝑢(𝑧)+ 𝒚𝐼,𝑎 [𝐾], (B.6)
𝑧∈(𝐼)∶𝜎𝑟(𝑧)=(𝐽,𝑎′) 𝐾∈𝐶(𝐽,𝑎′)
while, for sequence 𝜎 𝑟(𝐼), Constraint(B.3b)can be written as 𝒚𝐼,𝑎[𝐼 ∅] ≥𝒚𝐼,𝑎[𝐼]. Intuitively, at any optimal solution to Problem(B.3),
we can interpret the value of the dual variable 𝒚𝐼,𝑎[𝐼 ] as the receiver’s expected utility obtained by playing the best possible
∅
continuation strategy after being recommended action 𝑎at infoset 𝐼. Indeed, the first term in the right-hand-side of Equation(B.6)
is the utility immediately obtainable after playing 𝑎′ at infoset 𝐽, while the second term recursively encodes the utilities obtained
(non-immediately) following 𝑎′at 𝐽. □
Φ⋄(𝝁⋆) ≡Λ(𝝁⋆) ⊆Λ𝜖(𝝁⋆) ⊆Φ⋄ 𝜖(𝝁⋆).
Lemma 2. It is always the case that
Φ⋄(𝝁⋆) ≡Λ(𝝁⋆). 𝝓∈Φ⋄(𝝁⋆).
Proof. First, we prove that Suppose that Then, Definition2implies
𝑈𝝎→𝝆 (𝝓,𝝁⋆ )−𝑈(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )≤0,
for every 𝝎∈Ωand 𝝆∈. Thus, by Theorem1we have that:
∑ ( )
𝝎[𝜎] 𝑈 𝜎→𝝆𝜎(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )−𝑈(𝝓,𝝁⋆ ) ≤0,
𝜎∈Σ𝑟
for every 𝝎∈Ωand 𝝆∈, which implies that:
𝝆𝜎m ∈a x 𝑟,𝐼𝑈 𝜎→𝝆𝜎(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )−𝑈(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )≤0 ∀𝜎∈Σ𝑟,
𝝓∈Λ(𝝁⋆),
and proving the first part of the statement.
Λ(𝝁⋆) ⊆Φ⋄(𝝁⋆) Λ(𝝁⋆) ≡Φ⋄(𝝁⋆).
On the other hand, is directly implied by Corollary1. Thus, Moreover, from Definition 4it
Λ(𝝁⋆) ⊆Λ𝜖(𝝁⋆).
trivially follows that
16

M.Bernasconi,M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesietal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104245
Fig.C.5.Tree structure used in the proof of Theorem4. Black round nodes are decision nodes  𝑑. White round nodes are the chance nodes  𝑐, while graysquare
nodes are the terminal nodes .
Finally, we prove that Λ𝜖(𝝁⋆) ⊆Φ⋄ 𝜖(𝝁⋆). Given 𝜖>0, let 𝝓∈Λ𝜖(𝝁⋆). By Corollary1, it holds:
[ ]
∑ +
(𝝎,𝝆m )∈a Ωx ×𝑈𝝎→𝝆 (𝝓,𝝁⋆ )−𝑈(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )≤ 𝝆𝜎m ∈a x 𝑟,𝐼𝑈 𝜎→𝝆𝜎(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )−𝑈(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )
𝜎=(𝐼,𝑎)∈Σ𝑟
∑ 𝜖
≤ =𝜖,
𝜎=(𝐼,𝑎)∈Σ𝑟|Σ𝑟|
which implies that 𝝓∈Φ⋄ 𝜖(𝝁⋆). This concludes the proof. □
𝝁⋆
Theorem 2. The BPSDM problem can be solved in polynomial time when the prior is known.
Proof. It is easy to check that the problem can be written as the following linear program:
max 𝐹(𝝓,𝝁⋆ ),
𝝓∈Λ(𝝁⋆)
Λ(𝝁⋆)is
where the objective function is linear and a polytope that can be represented by a polynomial number of linear inequalities,
by Lemma1. □
AppendixC. Proofs omitted from Section7
Theorem 4 (Impossibility of persuasiveness). There exists a constant 𝛾∈(0, 1)such that no algorithm can guarantee to output a sequence
𝝓 1, … , 𝝓 𝑇 of signaling schemes such that, with probability at least 𝛾, all the signaling schemes 𝝓 𝑡are persuasive.
Proof. We define two instances i and j of the BPSDM problem based on the tree structure presented in Fig. C.5. In instance i,
respectively j, the prior is defined as follows:
⎧𝝁⋆[(ℎ ,𝑐)]=1+𝜖
⎪ 1 2
⎪𝝁⋆[(ℎ ,𝑑)]=1−𝜖
i∶=⎨ 1 2 ,
⎪ ⎪ ⎩𝝁𝝁⋆ ⋆[ [( (ℎ ℎ2 2, ,𝑒 𝑓) )] ]= =1 2 1 2− +𝜖 𝜖
⎧𝝁⋆[(ℎ ,𝑐)]=1−𝜖
⎪ 1 2
⎪𝝁⋆[(ℎ ,𝑑)]=1+𝜖
j∶=⎨ 1 2 .
⎪ ⎪ ⎩𝝁𝝁⋆ ⋆[ [( (ℎ ℎ2 2, ,𝑒 𝑓) )] ]= =1 2 1 2+ −𝜖 𝜖
Moreover, for both instances 𝑢(𝑧 ) =𝑢(𝑧 ) =1 and 𝑢(𝑧 ) =𝑢(𝑧 ) =0. A direct computation shows that, in instance i, it holds
∑ 1 3 2 4 ∑
𝑉 𝑇i=2𝜖 𝑇 𝑡=1𝝓 𝑡[(ℎ 0, 𝑏)], while one can similarly compute that 𝑉 𝑇j=2𝜖 𝑇 𝑡=1𝝓 𝑡[(ℎ 0, 𝑎)]. Let ℙiand ℙjbe the probability measures of
instance iand j, respectively. Assume that ℙj[𝑉j≤0] ≥1 −𝛿. Then, we know from the Pinsker inequality that:
𝑇
[ ] √
∑𝑇
1
ℙi 𝝓 𝑡[(ℎ 0,𝑎)]≤0 ≥1− 2(i,j)−𝛿,
𝑡=1
where (i, j)is the Kullback-Leibler divergence between instance iand j. By using the Kullback-Leibler decomposition (see, e.g., [44]
for more details), we can state that:
(i,j)=2𝑇(𝐵 1∕2+𝜖,𝐵 1∕2−𝜖),
where (𝐵 1∕2+𝜖, 𝐵 1∕2−𝜖) ≤16𝜖2 is the Kullback-Leibler divergence between a Bernoulli of parameter 1∕2 +𝜖 and one of parameter
1∕2 −𝜖. Thus:
17

M.Bernasconi,M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesietal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104245
[ ]
∑𝑇 √
ℙi 𝝓 𝑡[(ℎ 0,𝑎)]≤0 ≥1−4𝜖 𝑇−𝛿.
𝑡=1
∑
Moreover, in instance i, we have that 𝑉 𝑇i=2𝜖 𝑇 𝑡=1𝝓 𝑡[(ℎ 0, 𝑏)], which implies:
[ ] √
ℙi 𝑉i≥2𝜖𝑇 ≥1−4𝜖 𝑇−𝛿.
𝑇
By setting 𝜖= √1 , we have that:
16 𝑇
[ √ ]
1
ℙi 𝑉i≥ 𝑇 ≥0.75−𝛿.
𝑇 8
Thus, any algorithm that guarantees with high probability 𝑅 𝑇 ≤0in instance jfails with high probability in instance i. This proves
the claim. □
AppendixD. Proofs omitted from Section8
Before presenting the proofs of the results in Section8, we introduce some preliminary lemmas.
Lemma 7. Given any 𝝓∈Φ and 𝝁, 𝝁′∈ 𝑐, if it is the case that 𝝓∈Λ𝜖(𝝁) and ‖𝝁−𝝁′‖ ∞≤𝛾, then it holds that 𝝓∈Λ𝜖′(𝝁′) with
𝜖′=2|||Σ𝑟|𝛾+𝜖.
Proof. For every (𝜎, 𝝆 𝜎)-SPDP with 𝜎=(𝐼, 𝑎), the following inequalities hold:
𝑈 𝜎→𝝆𝜎(𝝓,𝝁′)−𝑈 ∑(𝝓,𝝁′)
∑
= 𝝓[(ℎ 𝐼(𝑧),𝑎)]𝝆 𝜎[𝜎 𝑟(𝑧)]𝝁′[𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]𝑢(𝑧)− 𝝓[𝜎 𝑠(𝑧)]𝝁′[𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]𝑢(𝑧)
(𝐼) 𝑧∈𝑍(𝜎)
∑ ( )
≤ 𝝓[(ℎ 𝐼(𝑧),𝑎)]𝝆 𝜎[𝜎 𝑟(𝑧)] 𝝁′[𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]−𝝁[𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)] 𝑢(𝑧)
(𝐼)
∑ ( ) 𝜖
− 𝑧∈(𝜎)𝝓[𝜎 𝑠(𝑧)] 𝝁′[𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]−𝝁[𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)] 𝑢(𝑧)+
|Σ𝑟|
𝜖 𝜖
≤2||‖𝝁−𝝁′‖ + ≤2||𝛾+ ,
∞ |Σ𝑟| |Σ𝑟|
where in the first inequality we added and subtracted the difference 𝑈 𝜎→𝝆𝜎(𝝓, 𝝁) −𝑈(𝝓, 𝝁)and used the fact that 𝝓∈Λ𝜖(𝝁), while
the second-to-last inequality follows from Hölder’s inequality. Since 𝑈 𝜎→𝝆𝜎(𝝓, 𝝁′) −𝑈(𝝓, 𝝁′) ≤2||𝛾+ |Σ𝜖 ∶= |Σ𝜖′ holds for every
𝑟| 𝑟|
(𝜎, 𝝆 𝜎)-SPDP, we have that 𝝓∈Λ𝜖′(𝝁′)with 𝜖′=|||Σ𝑟|𝛾+𝜖, concluding the proof. □
Lemma 8. Given any 𝛿∈(0, 1), Algorithm1guarantees that ℙ[] ≥1 −𝛿, where:
{ }
∶= ‖𝝁̂ 𝑡−𝝁⋆‖ ∞≤𝜖 ∀𝑡∈[𝑇] ,
𝑡
and 𝜖 𝑡is chosen according to Algorithm1.
Proof. Let  𝑡(𝛿)be defined as follows:
{ √ }
𝝁| log(2𝑇 2| 𝑡Σ𝑐|∕𝛿)
 𝑡(𝛿)∶= | ||𝝁[𝜎]−𝝁̂ 𝑡[𝜎]|≤ ∀𝜎∈Σ𝑐 .
Clearly, ℙ[] =ℙ[𝝁⋆∈ 𝑡(𝛿) ∀𝑡 ∈[𝑇]]. By Hoeffding’s inequality, we have that:
( √ )
log(2𝑇 2| 𝑡Σ𝑐|∕𝛿) 𝑇|𝛿
ℙ |𝝁⋆ [𝜎]−𝝁̂ 𝑡[𝜎]|≤ ≥1− Σ𝑐|.
By a union bound over 𝜎∈Σ𝑐 and 𝑡 ∈[𝑇], we get that:
( √ )
log(2𝑇 2| 𝑡Σ𝑐|∕𝛿)
ℙ |𝝁⋆ [𝜎]−𝝁̂ 𝑡[𝜎]|≤ ∀𝜎∈Σ𝑐 ∀𝑡∈[𝑇] ≥1−𝛿.
This concludes the proof of the lemma. □
Lemma 9. If the event  holds, Algorithm1guarantees that 𝝓⋆ ∈Λ𝛽𝑡(𝝁̂ 𝑡)for all 𝑡 ∈[𝑇].
18

M.Bernasconi,M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesietal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104245
Proof. By definition, we have that 𝝓⋆ ∈Λ(𝝁⋆). Moreover, since we conditioned on , we have that:
‖𝝁⋆ −𝝁̂ 𝑡‖ ∞≤𝜖 ∀𝑡∈[𝑇].
𝑡
Thus, we can exploit Lemma7, which, by letting 𝛽 𝑡∶=2|||Σ𝑟|𝜖 𝑡, gives that 𝝓⋆ ∈Λ𝛽𝑡(𝝁̂ 𝑡). □
Lemma 10. If the event  holds, Algorithm1guarantees that 𝝓 𝑡∈Λ 2𝛽𝑡(𝝁⋆)for all 𝑡 ∈[𝑇].
P bero to hf e. caG si ev e thn h o ‖w ⋆A −lgo 𝝁̂r 𝑡i ‖th ≤m 𝑡1 fow ro ar lk ls 𝑡, ∈we h ]a v Te t uh sa t 𝝓 𝑡 L∈ emΛ m𝛽𝑡 a(𝝁̂ 7𝑡) w. eO n t th ae o tt hh ae tr 𝝓ha 𝑡n ∈d Λ, s 2i 𝛽n 𝑡(c 𝝁e w ),e c ho en rd ei t 𝛽io 𝑡n ise d eo fin eth de e sv ie nn tt  , i rt m ofu ost
a t 𝝁 𝜖 [𝑇 . h , b y ob in ⋆ w d n a h e p o f
Lemma9. □
Theorem 5. Given any 𝛿∈(0, 1), with probability at least 1 −𝛿, Algorithm1guarantees:
( √ ) ( √ )
( ) ( )
𝑅 = || 𝑇log 𝑇|Σ𝑐|∕𝛿 , 𝑉 = |Σ𝑟||| 𝑇log 𝑇|Σ𝑐|∕𝛿 .
𝑇 𝑇
Moreover, the algorithm runs in polynomial time.
Proof. First, we bound the computational complexity of the algorithm, then we separately analyze the sender’s regret 𝑅 𝑇 and the
receiver’s regret 𝑉 𝑇.
Complexity.With an argument analogous to the one used for the proof of Theorem2, we have that the optimization problem solved
bySelectStrategy()in Algorithm1is a polynomially-sized linear problem (Lemma1). Hence, it can be solved in polynomial time.
Sender’s regret.If the event  holds, which happens with probability at least 1 −𝛿, then:
𝝁⋆ [𝜎]−𝜖 𝑡≤𝝁̂ 𝑡[𝜎]≤𝝁⋆ [𝜎]+𝜖 𝑡,
for every sequence 𝜎∈Σ𝑐 and round 𝑡 ∈[𝑇]. This implies that, for every 𝝓∈Φ, we have:
𝐹(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )−||𝜖 𝑡≤𝐹(𝝓,𝝁̂ 𝑡)≤𝐹(𝝓,𝝁⋆ )+||𝜖 𝑡.
Moreover, under the event , we have that 𝝓⋆ ∈Λ𝛽𝑡(𝝁̂ 𝑡)and, thus, 𝐹(𝝓⋆, 𝝁̂ 𝑡) ≤𝐹(𝝓 𝑡, 𝝁̂ 𝑡)as 𝝓 𝑡is computed by optimizing 𝐹(⋅, 𝝁̂ 𝑡)
over Λ𝛽𝑡(𝝁̂ 𝑡). By putting all the above results together, we get that, under event , the following holds:
𝐹(𝝓⋆,𝝁⋆ )≤𝐹(𝝓⋆,𝝁̂ 𝑡)+||𝜖 𝑡≤𝐹(𝝓 𝑡,𝝁̂ 𝑡)+||𝜖 𝑡≤𝐹(𝝓 𝑡,𝝁⋆ )+2||𝜖 𝑡.
∑ √
By rearranging the terms, taking the sum over 𝑡 ∈[𝑇], and using 𝑇 𝑡=1√1 𝑡≤2 𝑇, we get:
∑𝑇 ( ) ∑𝑇 √
𝑅 𝑇 ∶= 𝐹(𝝓⋆,𝝁⋆ )−𝐹(𝝓 𝑡,𝝁⋆ ) ≤2|| 𝜖 𝑡≤2|| 2log(2𝑇|Σ𝑐|∕𝛿)𝑇,
𝑡=1 𝑡=1
which holds under the event , and, thus, with probability at least 1 −𝛿.
R the ac te i 𝝓ve 𝑡r ∈’s Φre ⋄ 2g 𝛽r 𝑡e (t 𝝁. ⋆If ) .t h Te h ie sv ie mn pt l iesh to hl ad ts ,, wth ita hn k ps r oto b aL be im litm y a at1 l0 eaw ste 1 h −av 𝛿e , tt hh ea t f o𝝓 l𝑡 lo∈ wΛ in2 g𝛽 𝑡 h(𝝁 o⋆ ld) s. :Thus, by using Lemma2, we can conclude
∑𝑇 √
𝑉 ≤2 𝛽 𝑡≤4|Σ𝑟||| 2log(2𝑇|Σ𝑐|∕𝛿)𝑇,
𝑇
𝑡=1
which concludes the proof. □
AppendixE. Proofs omitted from Section9
Lemma 3. For every deterministic signaling scheme 𝝅∈Π, let
{ }
Σ↓(𝝅)∶= 𝜎=(ℎ,𝑎)∈Σ𝑐∣𝑎∈𝐴(ℎ)∧𝝅[𝜎 𝑠(ℎ)]=1 .
[ ]
It holds 𝔼 𝒑 𝑡[𝜎]|𝝅 𝑡=𝝅 =𝝁⋆[𝜎]for every 𝝅∈Πand 𝜎∈Σ↓(𝝅).
Proof. Let 𝝅 𝑡 be the pure strategy sampled from 𝝓 𝑡. Hence, for any sequence 𝜎 we have that the event of reaching node ℎ is a
Bernoulli with parameter:
19

M.Bernasconi,M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesietal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104245
𝔼[𝒑 𝑡[𝜎]|𝝅=𝝅 𝑡]=𝝅 𝑡[𝜎]𝝁⋆ [𝜎].
Thus, by definition, if 𝜎∈Σ↓(𝝅 𝑡)we have that 𝝅 𝑡[𝜎] =1and the statement holds. □
Lemma 11. Given any 𝛿∈(0, 1), Algorithm2guarantees that with probability at least 1 −𝛿∕2:
∑𝑇 ∑ √ √
𝜖 𝑡[𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]𝝓 𝑡[𝜎 𝑠(𝑧)]≤ log(4𝑇|Σ𝑐|∕𝛿)|Σ𝑐|𝑇 +|| log(2∕𝛿)𝑇,
𝑡=𝑁+1𝑧∈
where the terms 𝜖 𝑡[𝜎]for 𝜎∈Σ𝑐 and 𝑡 ∈[𝑇]are defined according to Algorithm2.
Proof. First, let us consider the deterministic signaling scheme 𝝅 𝑡∈Πsampled by the algorithm according to 𝝓 𝑡 at round 𝑡 ∈[𝑇].
For convenience, in the following we report the definition of 𝜖 𝑡[𝜎](according to Algorithm2) for each 𝜎∈Σ𝑐 and 𝑡 ∈[𝑇]:
√
𝜖 𝑡[𝜎]∶= log( 24 𝐶𝑇 𝑡| [Σ 𝜎𝑐 ]|∕𝛿) ,
where 𝐶 𝑡[𝜎]represents the number of rounds 𝑡′≤𝑡in which it is the case that 𝜎∈Σ↓(𝝅 𝑡′). Then, the following chain of inequalities
holds:
∑𝑇 ∑
𝜖 𝑡[𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]𝝅 𝑡[𝜎 𝑠(𝑧)] (E.1a)
𝑡=𝑁+1𝑧∈
⎛ ⎞
∑𝑇 ∑ ⎜ ∑ ⎟
= ⎜ ⎜𝜖 𝑡[𝜎] 𝝅 𝑡[𝜎′]⎟ (E.1b)
⎟
𝑡=𝑁+1 𝜎∈Σ𝑐∶ ⎜ 𝜎′∈Σ𝑠∶ ⎟
∃𝑧∈∶𝜎=𝜎𝑐(𝑧)⎝ ∃𝑧∈∶𝜎=𝜎𝑐(𝑧)∧𝜎′=𝜎𝑠(𝑧) ⎠
∑𝑇 ∑
≤ 𝜖 𝑡[𝜎]𝝅 𝑡[𝜎 𝑠(ℎ)] (E.1c)
𝑡=𝑁+1𝜎=(ℎ,𝑎)∈Σ𝑐
∑ ∑
= 𝜖 𝑡[𝜎] (E.1d)
𝜎=(ℎ,𝑎)∈Σ𝑐 𝑡∈[𝑇]∶
𝑡≥𝑁+1∧𝝅𝑡[𝜎𝑠(ℎ)]=1
√
∑ 𝐶∑𝑇[𝜎] log(4𝑇|Σ𝑐|∕𝛿)
= (E.1e)
2𝑡
𝜎∈Σ𝑐𝑡=𝐶𝑁+1[𝜎]
∑ √
≤ log(4𝑇|Σ𝑐|∕𝛿)𝐶 𝑇[𝜎] (E.1f)
𝜎∈Σ𝑐
√
≤ log(4𝑇|Σ𝑐|∕𝛿)|Σ𝑐|𝑇, (E.1g)
where Equation(E.1c)follows by the definition of sequence-form signaling scheme of the sender, Equation(E.1d)follows by exchang-
ing the sums over 𝜎∈Σ𝑐 and 𝑡 ∈[𝑇] ∑and recallin√g that 𝝅 𝑡is a deterministic signaling scheme, Equation(E.1e)holds by definition of
𝜖, while Equation(E.1f)comes from 𝑇 𝑡=1 ∑√1 𝑡≤2 ∑𝑇. Finally, Equation(E.1g)follows from the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.
Next, we provide a similar bound on 𝑇 𝑡=𝑁+1 𝑧∈𝜖 𝑡[𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]𝝓 𝑡[𝜎 𝑠(𝑧)]. We do this by exploiting the Azuma-Hoeffding inequal-
ity [45]. Indeed, we have that 𝔼[𝝅 𝑡[𝜎]| 𝑡−1] =𝝓 𝑡[𝜎], where  𝑡−1 is the filtration generated up to time 𝑡 −1 from the interaction
between the algorithm and the BPSDM problem. Thus, with probability at least 1 −𝛿∕2the following holds:
∑𝑇 ∑ ∑𝑇 ∑ √
𝜖 𝑡[𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]𝝓 𝑡[𝜎 𝑠(𝑧)]≤ 𝜖 𝑡[𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]𝝅 𝑡[𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]+|| log(2∕𝛿)𝑇.
𝑡=𝑁+1𝑧∈ 𝑡=𝑁+1𝑧∈
By combining the equation above with Equation(E.1f), we obtain:
∑𝑇 ∑ √ √
𝜖 𝑡[𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]𝝓 𝑡[𝜎 𝑠(𝑧)]≤ log(4𝑇|Σ𝑐|∕𝛿)|Σ𝑐|𝑇 +|| log(2∕𝛿)𝑇.
𝑡=𝑁+1𝑧∈
This concludes the proof. □
Lemma 4. Under the event ̃ , Algorithm2guarantees that 𝝓 𝑡∈Λ 2𝛽𝑁(𝝁⋆)at each round 𝑡 >𝑁.
20

M.Bernasconi,M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesietal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104245
̃
Proof. The proof is similar to the one of Lemma10. If the event holds, then we have that:
‖𝝁⋆ −𝝁̂ 𝑁‖ ∞≤ 𝜎m ∈a Σx 𝑐𝜖 𝑡[𝜎]∶=𝜖 𝑁.
Moreover, 𝝓 𝑡∈Λ𝛽𝑁(𝝁̂ 𝑁)a √nd we can use Lemma7to conclude that 𝝓 𝑡∈Λ𝛽𝑁+2𝜖𝑁|Σ𝑟|||(𝝁⋆)for all 𝑡 >𝑁. The proof follows from
𝛽 𝑁≥2𝜖 𝑁|||Σ𝑟|, since 𝜖 𝑁≤ log(4𝑇| 2Σ 𝑁𝑐|∕𝛿)|Σ𝑐| . □
Lemma 5. If the event ̃ holds, then, for every round 𝑡 >𝑁, it holds that 𝝓⋆ ∈Λ𝛽𝑁(𝝁̂ 𝑡)and max𝝁∈𝑡(𝛿)𝐹(𝝓⋆, 𝝁) ≥𝐹(𝝓⋆, 𝝁⋆).
𝝓⋆ ∈Λ(𝝁⋆)and, ̃
Proof. Since under the event , it holds that:
‖𝝁⋆ −𝝁̂ 𝑁‖ ∞≤ 𝜎m ∈a Σx 𝑐𝜖 𝑡[𝜎]∶=𝜖 𝑁,
we can use Lemma7to √ conclude that 𝝓⋆ ∈Λ 2|Σ𝑐|||𝜖𝑁(𝝁̂ 𝑁). The proof of the first statement is concluded by observing that 𝛽 𝑁 ≥
2|Σ𝑟|||𝜖 𝑁, since 𝜖 𝑁≤ log(4𝑇| 2Σ 𝑁𝑐|∕𝛿)|Σ𝑐| . The second statement directly follows from the observation that, under the event ̃ , it holds
𝝁⋆∈ 𝑡(𝛿). □
Theorem 6. Given any 𝛿∈(0, 1)and 𝑁∈[𝑇], Algorithm2guarantees:
√ √
⎛ ( ) ⎞ ⎛ ( ) ⎞
𝑇| 𝛿Σ𝑐| 𝑇| 𝛿Σ𝑐| |Σ 𝑁𝑐|
𝑅 𝑇 =⎜ ⎜𝑁+ log |Σ𝑐|𝑇⎟ ⎟,𝑉 𝑇 =⎜ ⎜𝑁+𝑇|||Σ𝑟| log ⎟ ⎟,
⎝ ⎠ ⎝ ⎠
with probability at least 1 −𝛿. Moreover, the algorithm runs in polynomial time.
Proof. First, we bound the computational complexity of the algorithm, then we separately analyze the sender’s regret 𝑅 𝑇 and the
receiver’s regret 𝑉 𝑇.
Complexity.First, observe that 𝐹(𝝓, 𝝁)is a linear function in 𝝁and it only has positive terms. Thus, for every 𝝓∈Φ, the maximum over
 𝑡(𝛿)in the optimization problem solved during the second phase of theSelectStrategy()procedure is reached on the boundary
of  𝑡(𝛿), so that larger entries of 𝝁provide larger objective values. Formally, we define:
𝝁 𝑡∈arg max 𝐹(𝝓,𝝁),
𝝁∈𝑡(𝛿)
which is independent of 𝝓. Then, for every 𝜎∈Σ𝑐, we have that 𝝁 𝑡[𝜎] =𝝁̂ 𝑡[𝜎] +𝜖 𝑡[𝜎]. Thus, we can compute the signaling scheme
𝝓 𝑡with a linear program as follows:
𝝓 𝑡← max 𝐹(𝝓,𝝁 𝑡), (E.2)
𝝓∈Λ𝛽𝑡(𝝁̂𝑡)
and, similarly to the proof of Theorem 5, we have that the optimization problem in Equation (E.2)is a polynomially-sized linear
program by Lemma1. Hence, it can be solved in polynomial time.
Sender’s regret.Under the event ̃ , which happens with probability at least 1 −𝛿∕2, we have that |𝝁⋆[𝜎] −𝝁̂ 𝑡[𝜎]| ≤𝜖 𝑡[𝜎]for all 𝑡 >𝑁.
Thus,
‖𝝁⋆ −𝝁̂ 𝑡‖ ∞≤ 𝜎m ∈a Σx 𝑐𝜖 𝑡[𝜎]∶=𝜖 𝑁. (E.3)
Then, we can conclude that, under event ̃ , it holds 𝝁⋆[𝜎] +2𝜖 𝑡[𝜎] ≥𝝁 𝑡[𝜎]. This in turn implies:
∑
𝐹(𝝓 𝑡,𝝁 𝑡)≤𝐹(𝝓 𝑡,𝝁⋆ )+2 𝜖 𝑡[𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]𝝓 𝑡[𝜎 𝑠(𝑧)].
𝑧∈
By Lemma5, we have that, under event ̃ , it holds 𝝓⋆ ∈Λ𝛽𝑁(𝝁̂ 𝑁). Hence, 𝐹(𝝓⋆, 𝝁 𝑡) ≤𝐹(𝝓 𝑡, 𝝁 𝑡)as 𝝓 𝑡is computed as the optimum
over Λ𝛽𝑁(𝝁 𝑡). Moreover, by Lemma5we also have that 𝐹(𝝓⋆, 𝝁⋆) ≤𝐹(𝝓⋆, 𝝁 𝑡), which implies:
∑
𝐹(𝝓⋆,𝝁⋆ )≤𝐹(𝝓⋆,𝝁 𝑡)≤𝐹(𝝓 𝑡,𝝁 𝑡)≤𝐹(𝝓 𝑡,𝝁⋆ )+2 𝜖 𝑡[𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]𝝓 𝑡[𝜎 𝑠(𝑧)].
𝑧∈
Then, we can decompose the sender’s regret as:
∑𝑁 ( ) ∑𝑇 ( )
𝑅 𝑇 = 𝐹(𝝓⋆,𝝁⋆ )−𝐹(𝝓 𝑡,𝝁⋆ ) + 𝐹(𝝓⋆,𝝁⋆ )−𝐹(𝝓 𝑡,𝝁⋆ )
𝑡=1 𝑡=𝑁+1
21

M.Bernasconi,M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesietal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104245
∑𝑇 ∑
≤𝑁+2 𝜖 𝑡[𝜎 𝑐(𝑧)]𝝓 𝑡[𝜎 𝑠(𝑧)].
𝑡=𝑁+1𝑧∈
By using Lemma11and a union bound, we can conclude that with probability at least 1 −𝛿:
(√ √ )
𝑅 ≤𝑁+2 log(4𝑇|Σ𝑐|∕𝛿)|Σ𝑐|𝑇 +|| log(2∕𝛿)𝑇 .
𝑇
R Λe 2c 𝛽e 𝑁iv (𝝁er ⋆’s r ⊆eg Φre 2t 𝛽. 𝑁B (y ⋆L )e .m Hm ena c4 e, u wn itd he r rt oh be ae bv ie lin tyt  ã t, lw eae th 1a v −e 𝛿t :hat 𝝓 𝑡∈Λ 2𝛽𝑁(𝝁⋆)for all 𝑡 ≥𝑁. Moreover, by Lemma2, it holds that
) ⋄ 𝝁 , p s
√
|Σ𝑐|log( 24 𝑁𝑇|Σ𝑐|∕𝛿)
𝑉 ≤𝑁+2𝑇𝛽 𝑁=𝑁+4𝑇|||Σ𝑟| .
𝑇
This concludes the proof. □
Theorem 7. For any 𝛼∈[1∕2, 1], there exists a constant 𝛾∈(0, 1)such that no algorithm guarantees both 𝑅 𝑇 =𝑜(𝑇𝛼)and 𝑉 𝑇 =𝑜(𝑇1−𝛼∕2)
with probability greater than 𝛾.
Proof. We define two instances iand jof a BPSDM problem whose tree structures are as in Fig.C.5. In both instances, we have that
𝑓(𝑧 ) =𝑓(𝑧 ) =1and 𝑓(𝑧 ) =𝑓(𝑧 ) =0for the sender, while 𝑢(𝑧 ) =𝑢(𝑧 ) =1and 𝑢(𝑧 ) =𝑢(𝑧 ) =0for the receiver. Moreover, in
1 2 3 4 1 3 2 4
both instances we have that for the chance node ℎ it holds 𝝁⋆[(ℎ , 𝑐)] =𝝁⋆[(ℎ , 𝑑)] =1∕2. Instead, the two instances differ in the
1 1 1
probabilities of chance node ℎ , which are defined as follows:
2
{
𝝁⋆[(ℎ ,𝑒)]=1−𝜖
i∶= 2 2 ,
𝝁⋆[(ℎ ,𝑓)]=1+𝜖
{ 2 2
𝝁⋆[(ℎ ,𝑒)]=1+𝜖
j∶= 2 2 .
𝝁⋆[(ℎ ,𝑓)]=1−𝜖
2 2
Simple calculations show that, in instance j, we have that the regret of the sender is:
∑𝑇
𝑅j = 𝝓 𝑡[(ℎ 0,𝑏)]
𝑇
𝑡=1
Hence, if we require that (in high probability with respect to the measure ℙj of instance j) the sender’s regret is smaller than a
threshold 𝐾, then:
[ ]
∑𝑇
ℙj 𝝓 𝑡[(ℎ 0,𝑏)]≤𝐾 ≥1−𝛿.
𝑡=1
The Pinsker’s inequality states that:
[ ] √
∑𝑇
1
ℙi 𝝓 𝑡[(ℎ 0,𝑏)]≤𝐾 ≥1−𝛿− 2(j,i),
𝑡=1
where (j, i)is the Kullback-Leibler divergence between instance jand instance i. By the well-known decomposition theorem of the
divergence, we know that:
[ ] [ ]
∑𝑇 ∑𝑇
(j,i)=𝔼j 𝝓 𝑡[(ℎ 0,𝑏)] (𝐵 1∕2+𝜖,𝐵 1∕2−𝜖)≤16𝜖2𝔼j 𝝓 𝑡[(ℎ 0,𝑏)] ,
𝑡=1 𝑡=1
where (𝐵 1∕2+𝜖, 𝐵 1∕2−𝜖) is the Kullba[ ∑ck-Leibler diver]gence between two Bernoulli random variable with parameter 1∕2 +𝜖 and
1∕2 −𝜖. Now, we can upper bound 𝔼j 𝑇 𝑡=1𝝓 𝑡[(ℎ 0,𝑏)] in terms of the probability ℙjwith the reverse Markov inequality, as follows:
[ ] [ ]
∑𝑇 ∑𝑇
𝔼j 𝝓 𝑡[(ℎ 0,𝑏)] ≤ℙj 𝝓 𝑡[(ℎ 0,𝑏)]≥𝐾 (𝑇 −𝐾)+𝐾
𝑡=1 𝑡=1
≤𝛿(𝑇 −𝐾)+𝐾.
Thus, we can conclude that:
[ ]
∑𝑇 √
ℙi 𝝓 𝑡[(ℎ 0,𝑏)]≤𝐾 ≥1−𝛿−2𝜖 2(𝛿(𝑇 −𝐾)+𝐾). (E.4)
𝑡=1
22

M.Bernasconi,M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesietal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104245
Now, we consider the receiver’s regret in instance i, which can be computed as:
∑𝑇
𝑉 𝑇i=𝜖 𝝓 𝑡[(ℎ 0,𝑏)].
𝑡=1
This, together with Equation(E.4), allows us to conclude that:
[ ] √
ℙi 𝑉i≥𝜖(𝑇 −𝐾) ≥1−𝛿−2𝜖 2(𝛿(𝑇−𝐾)+𝐾).
𝑇
𝐾=𝑇𝛼 𝜖=𝑇−𝛼∕2
By setting and , we can conclude that if
8 8
[ ]
[ 𝑇𝛼] ∑𝑇 𝑇𝛼
ℙj 𝑅j ≤ ≥ℙj 𝝓 𝑡[(ℎ 0,𝑎)]≤ ≥1−𝛿,
𝑇 8 8
𝑡=1
then
[ ] √
𝑇1−𝛼∕2 2
ℙi 𝑉i≥ ≥1− −𝛿≥0.91−𝛿,
𝑇 16 16
𝑇1−𝛼∕2 −𝑇𝛼∕2 ≥𝑇1−𝛼∕2 𝛿≤𝑇𝛼−1
where we used that for 𝑇 ≥1and that we can assume . □
8 64 16 4
Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.
References
[1]M.Bernasconi,M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesi,N.Gatti,F.Trovò,Sequentialinformationdesign:learningtopersuadeinthedark,in:NeurIPS,2022.
[2]E.Kamenica,M.Gentzkow,Bayesianpersuasion,Am.Econ.Rev.101(6)(2011)2590–2615.
[3]P.BroMiltersen,O.Sheffet,Sendmixedsignals:earnmore,workless,in:EC,2012,pp.234–247.
[4]FeldmanM.EmekY,I.Gamzu,R.PaesLeme,M.Tennenholtz,Signalingschemesforrevenuemaximization,TEAC2(2)(2014)1–19.
[5]A.Badanidiyuru,K.Bhawalkar,H.Xu,Targetingandsignalinginadauctions,in:SODA,2018,pp.2545–2563.
[6]M.Castiglioni,G.Romano,A.Marchesi,N.Gatti,Signalinginpostedpriceauctions,in:AAAI,2022.
[7]R.Alonso,O.Câmara,Persuadingvoters,Am.Econ.Rev.106(11)(2016)3590–3605.
[8]Y.Cheng,H.Y.Cheung,S.Dughmi,E.Emamjomeh-Zadeh,L.Han,S.Teng,Mixtureselection,mechanismdesign,andsignaling,in:IEEE56thAnnualSymposium
onFoundationsofComputerScience,FOCS2015,Berkeley,CA,USA,17–20October,2015,2015,pp.1426–1445.
[9]M.Castiglioni,GattiN.CelliA,Persuadingvoters:it’seasytowhisper,it’shardtospeakloud,in:AAAI,2020,pp.1870–1877.
[10] M.Castiglioni,N.Gatti,Persuadingvotersindistrict-basedelections,in:AAAI,2021,pp.5244–5251.
[11] U.Bhaskar,KoY.K.ChengY,C.Swamy,HardnessresultsforsignalinginBayesianzero-sumandnetworkroutinggames,in:EC,2016,pp.479–496.
[12] M.Castiglioni,A.Celli,A.Marchesi,N.Gatti,SignalinginBayesiannetworkcongestiongames:thesubtlepowerofsymmetry,in:AAAI,2021,pp.5252–5259.
[13] Y.Mansour,A.Slivkins,V.Syrgkanis,Z.S.Wu,Bayesianexploration:incentivizingexplorationinBayesiangames,in:EC,2016,p.661.
[14] Z.Rabinovich,A.X.Jiang,M.Jain,H.Xu,Informationdisclosureasameanstosecurity,in:AAMAS,2015,pp.645–653.
[15] H.Xu,R.Freeman,V.Conitzer,S.Dughmi,M.Tambe,SignalinginBayesianStackelberggames,in:AAMAS,2016,pp.150–158.
[16] Y.Babichenko,S.Barman,AlgorithmicaspectsofprivateBayesianpersuasion,in:ITCS,2017.
[17] O.Candogan,Persuasioninnetworks:publicsignalsandk-cores,in:EC,2019,pp.133–134.
[18] M.Castiglioni,A.Celli,A.Marchesi,N.Gatti,OnlineBayesianpersuasion,in:NeurIPS,2020,pp.16188–16198.
[19] M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesi,A.Celli,N.Gatti,Multi-receiveronlineBayesianpersuasion,in:ICML,2021,pp.1314–1323.
[20] Y.Zu,K.Iyer,H.Xu,Learningtopersuadeonthefly:robustnessagainstignorance,in:EC,2021,pp.927–928.
[21] Y.Babichenko,I.Talgam-Cohen,H.Xu,K.Zabarnyi,Regret-minimizingBayesianpersuasion,in:EC,2021,p.128.
[22] M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesi,N.Gatti,Bayesianpersuasionmeetsmechanismdesign:goingbeyondintractabilitywithtypereporting,in:AAMAS,2022.
[23] M.Bernasconi,M.Castiglioni,A.Celli,A.Marchesi,F.Trovò,N.Gatti,OptimalratesandefficientalgorithmsforonlineBayesianpersuasion,in:International
ConferenceonMachineLearning,in:PMLR,2023,pp.2164–2183.
[24] Y.Zu,K.Iyer,H.Xu,Learningtopersuadeonthefly:robustnessagainstignorance,in:EC,2021,pp.927–928.
[25] M.K.Camara,J.D.Hartline,A.Johnsen,Mechanismsforano-regretagent:beyondthecommonprior,in:2020Ieee61stAnnualSymposiumonFoundationsof
ComputerScience(Focs),IEEE,2020,pp.259–270.
[26] J.Gan,R.Majumdar,G.Radanovic,A.Singla,Bayesianpersuasioninsequentialdecision-making,in:AAAI,2022.
[27] J.Wu,Z.Zhang,Z.Feng,Z.Wang,Z.Yang,M.I.Jordan,etal.,Sequentialinformationdesign:Markovpersuasionprocessanditsefficientreinforcementlearning,
arXivpreprintarXiv:2202.10678,2022.
[28] M.Bernasconi,M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesi,M.Mutti,Persuadingfarsightedreceiversinmdps:thepowerofhonesty,in:NeurIPS,2023.
[29] A.Celli,S.Coniglio,N.Gatti,PrivateBayesianpersuasionwithsequentialgames,AAAI34(02)(2020)1886–1893.
[30] S.T.Su,V.G.Subramanian,G.Schoenebeck,Bayesianpersuasioninsequentialtrials,in:WebandInternetEconomics:17thInternationalConference,WINE
2021,Potsdam,Germany,December14–17,2021,Proceedings,Springer,2022,pp.22–40.
[31] B.Ni,W.Shen,P.Tang,Sequentialpersuasionusinglimitedexperiments,arXivpreprintarXiv:2303.10619,2023.
[32] M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesi,A.Celli,N.Gatti,Multi-receiveronlineBayesianpersuasion,in:ICML,vol.139,2021,pp.1314–1323.
[33] M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesi,N.Gatti,Bayesianpersuasionmeetsmechanismdesign:goingbeyondintractabilitywithtypereporting,in:AAMAS2022.Interna-
tionalFoundationforAutonomousAgentsandMultiagentSystems(IFAAMAS),2022,pp.226–234.
[34] M.Bernasconi-de-Luca,F.Cacciamani,S.Fioravanti,N.Gatti,A.Marchesi,F.Trovò,Exploitingopponentsunderutilityconstraintsinsequentialgames,in:
NeurIPS2021,2021,pp.13177–13188.
[35] M.Bernasconi,F.Cacciamani,M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesi,N.Gatti,F.Trovò,Safelearningintree-formsequentialdecisionmaking:handlinghardandsoft
constraints,in:ICML2022,vol.162,in:PMLR,2022,pp.1854–1873.
23

M.Bernasconi,M.Castiglioni,A.Marchesietal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104245
[36] BabichenkoY.ArieliI,PrivateBayesianpersuasion,J.Econ.Theory182(2019)185–217.
[37] B.VonStengel,F.Forges,Extensive-formcorrelatedequilibrium:definitionandcomputationalcomplexity,Math.Oper.Res.33(4)(2008)1002–1022.
[38] D.Morrill,R.D’Orazio,R.Sarfati,M.Lanctot,J.R.Wright,A.R.Greenwald,etal.,Hindsightandsequentialrationalityofcorrelatedplay,in:AAAI,vol.35,2021,
pp.5584–5594.
[39] D.Koller,N.Megiddo,B.VonStengel,Efficientcomputationofequilibriaforextensivetwo-persongames,GamesEcon.Behav.14(2)(1996)247–259.
[40] G.Farina,A.Celli,A.Marchesi,N.Gatti,Simpleuncoupledno-regretlearningdynamicsforextensive-formcorrelatedequilibrium,arXivpreprintarXiv:2104.
01520,2021.
[41] G. Farina, R. Schmucker, T. Sandholm, Bandit linear optimization for sequential decision making and extensive-form games, in: AAAI, vol. 35, 2021,
pp.5372–5380.
[42] C.J.Hillar,L.H.Lim,Mosttensorproblemsarenp-hard,J.ACM60(6)(2013)1–39.
[43] A.Celli,A.Marchesi,G.Farina,N.Gatti,No-regretlearningdynamicsforextensive-formcorrelatedequilibrium,in:NeurIPS,vol.33,2020,pp.7722–7732.
[44] T.Lattimore,C.Szepesvári,BanditAlgorithms,CambridgeUniversityPress,2020.
[45] N.Cesa-Bianchi,G.Lugosi,Prediction,Learning,andGames,CambridgeUniversityPress,2006.
24

