ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104235
ContentslistsavailableatScienceDirect
Artificial Intelligence
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/artint
TeachText: CrossModal text-video retrieval through generalized
distillation
Ioana Croitorua,b,1, Simion-Vlad Bogolina,b,1, Marius Leordeanuc, Hailin Jind,
Andrew Zissermana, Yang Liua,e,∗, Samuel Albanief,∗∗
aVisual Geometry Group, University of Oxford, United Kingdom
bInstitute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy, Romania
cUniversity Politehnica of Bucharest, Romania
dAdobe Research, USA
eWangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, China
fDepartment of Engineering, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords: In recent years, considerable progress on the task of text-video retrieval has been achieved
Text-video retrieval by leveraging large-scale pretraining on visual and audio datasets to construct powerful video
Distillation encoders. By contrast, despite the natural symmetry, the design of effective algorithms for
Texte mbeddings
exploiting large-scale language pretraining remains under-explored. In this work, we investigate
Videoexperts
the design of such algorithms and propose a novel generalized distillation method,TeachText,
which leverages complementary cues from multiple text encoders to provide an enhanced
supervisory signal to the retrieval model.TeachTextyields significant gains on a number of
video retrieval benchmarks without incurring additional computational overhead during inference
and was used to produce the winning entry in the Condensed Movie Challenge at ICCV 2021.
We show how TeachText can be extended to include multiple video modalities, reducing
computational cost at inference without compromising performance. Finally, we demonstrate
the application of our method to the task of removing noisy descriptions from the training
partitions of retrieval datasets to improve performance. Code and data can be found at https://
www .robots .ox .ac .uk /~vgg /research /teachtext/.
1. Introduction
The focus of this work is text-video retrieval—the task of identifying which video among a pool of candidates best matches a natural
language query describing its content. Video search has a broad range of applications across domains such as wildlife surveillance,
security, industrial process monitoring, and entertainment. Moreover, as humanity continues to produce video at ever-increasing scale,
the ability to perform such searches effectively and efficiently takes on critical commercial significance to video hosting platforms
such as YouTube.
* Correspondingauthorat:VisualGeometryGroup,UniversityofOxford,UnitedKingdom.
** Correspondingauthor.
E-mailaddress:samuel.albanie.academic@gmail.com(S.Albanie).
1 Equal contribution.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2024.104235
Received 5 November 2022; Received in revised form 11 September 2023; Accepted 12 October 2024
Availableonline30October2024
0004-3702/©2024PublishedbyElsevierB.V.

I.Croitoru,S.-V.Bogolin,M.Leordeanuetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104235
Fig.1.Distillingtheknowledgefrommultipletextencodersforstrongertext-videoretrieval.Priorwork[5–7]hasshowntheconsiderablebenefitoftransitioning
fromvideoencodersthatingestasinglemodality(left)tomulti-modalvideoencoders(centre).Inthiswork,weshowthatretrievalperformancecanbefurther
significantlyenhancedbylearningfrommultipletextencodersthroughtheTeachTextalgorithmwhichimposesnoadditionalcostduringinference.Resultsare
reportedontheMSR-VTTdataset[8].(Forinterpretationofthecoloursinthefigure(s),thereaderisreferredtothewebversionofthisarticle.)
A central theme of recently proposed retrieval methods has been the investigation of how to best use multiple video modalities to
improve performance. In particular, architectures based on mixtures-of-experts[6,5]and multi-modal transformers[7]have shown
the benefit of making use of diverse sets of pre-trained models for related tasks (such as image classification, action recognition and
ambient sound classification) as a basis for video encoding during training and testing.
In this work, we explore whether commensurate gains could be achieved by leveraging multiple text embeddings learned on
large-scale written corpora. More exactly, in the rapidly evolving field of text-to-video retrieval, the utilization of pre-trained text
embeddings has emerged as a pivotal element to enhance performance. These embeddings, designed to capture linguistic nuances
and semantic relationships, play a crucial role in determining how well a retrieval system matches textual queries to relevant video
content. But, how do these embeddings truly influence the retrieval results, especially given their diverse origins, architectures, and
training objectives? Consider a scenario where a user searches for a video depicting a ‘golden retriever playing fetch at sunset.’
Different text embeddings might prioritize different aspects: some may emphasize the ‘golden retriever’ due to the prevalent mention
of the breed in its training data, while others might focus on the atmospheric quality of ‘sunset’ due to their architectural nuances.
This raises pertinent questions: Are some embeddings more suited to certain tasks than others? How do variations in their training
objectives and data influence retrieval performance? Our exploration is centred on dissecting the differential impacts of various
popular pre-trained text embeddings on the retrieval tasks. Through this study, we aim to shed light on the nuances and variances
each embedding introduces, thereby offering insights that will help both researchers make informed decisions in their applications.
While intuitively this can easily be understood, different from video embeddings using multiple modalities and pretraining tasks,
in the research community, it is less obvious that there is sufficient diversity among collections of text embeddings to achieve a
meaningful boost in performance. In fact, our inspiration stems from a careful investigation of the performance of different text
embeddings across a range of retrieval benchmarks (Fig.2). Strikingly, we observe not only that there is considerable variance in
performance across text embeddings, but also that their ranking is not consistent, strongly supporting the idea of using multiple text
embeddings.
Motivated by this finding, we propose a simple algorithm,TeachText, to effectively exploit the knowledge captured by collections
of text embeddings. Our approach requires a “student” model to learn from a single or multiple “teacher” retrieval models with access
to different text embeddings by distilling their text-video similarity matrices into an enhanced supervisory signal. As shown in Fig.1,
TeachTextis capable of delivering a significant performance gain. Moreover, this gain is complementary to that of adding more video
modalities to the video encoder but importantly, unlike the addition of video modalities, does not incur additional computational
cost during inference.
Moreover, our proposed method has a range of potential applications within the text-video retrieval domain. A primary concern
in this area is dealing with label noise in datasets, especially those which are crowd-sourced. To address this, we highlight denoising
as a principal application of our approach. For instance, theMSR-VTTdataset contains captions that can be ambiguous or generic,
complicating the training process. Such captions, including examples like “A tutorial is presented” or “A man is writing”, can be
relevant to multiple videos. Using theTEACHTEXTteachers, our method offers a solution by filtering out these less precise captions,
thereby improving dataset quality. This denoising strategy proves especially valuable for datasets with multiple captions per video,
such as MSR-VTT and MSVD. Subsequent sections will delve deeper into the denoising application and discuss its effectiveness,
particularly in conjunction with the CE+ model, showcasing the broader applicability of our proposed method.
Moreover, as we delve deeper into our research, our primary focus remains on harnessing the power of multiple text embeddings
via a novel distillation approach. However, the foundational ideas of our method naturally extend to video embeddings. With this
in mind, we introduceTeachVideo, a direct adaptation that integrates various video modalities. In this way, as opposed to current
approaches, we use multiple video modalities only during training, while having only a small drop in performance.
Our core contributions are as follows:
1. We introduce theTeachTextalgorithm that makes effective use of multiple text encoders.
2. We advocate for a new method to directly learn the retrieval similarity matrix between joint query video embeddings, which is
unique in the current literature. We compare this approach to existing techniques like uni-modal relationship distillation[4].
2

I.Croitoru,S.-V.Bogolin,M.Leordeanuetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104235
3. We apply our method to remove noise from current training datasets used in the text-video retrieval task.
4. Through experimental results, we show that our method offers notable improvements on six text-video retrieval benchmarks.
This work builds upon our previous publication at ICCV 2021[1]in the following ways:
1. We enhance the CE+ architecture by adding two variants: one focused on minimizing parameters without sacrificing perfor-
mance, and another that uses the GPT-J[2]text embeddings, leading to better performance on all benchmarks.
2. We provide additional results on the Condensed Movies Dataset (CMD)[3], highlighting models from our TeachText-based
ensemble that performed well in the CMD Challenge.
3. For a deeper understanding of TeachText, we offer more detailed ablations and technical insights. An error analysis further
clarifies the benefits of using multiple text embeddings.
4. We expand our denoising experiments and provide a thorough analysis of theTeachVideoapproach.
2. Related work
This section synthesizes foundational and emergent literature across three pertinent domains: Video Retrieval Methods, Text
Embeddings, and Knowledge Distillation/Privileged Information. We examine methods for Video Retrieval that focus on indexing and
retrieving content based on textual queries. We also look into Text Embeddings, which discusses the use of linguistic representations
in a range of applications, including text-to-video retrieval. Finally, we explore the concept of Knowledge Distillation, a technique
for transferring knowledge between different machine learning models.
2.1. Video retrieval methods
The landscape of video content indexing and retrieval has evolved substantially over time, marked by key milestones that have
expanded the boundaries of the field. Early research focused on object-specific retrieval, with pioneering work by Sivic et al. in
2003[9]. This was followed by expansions into action-based retrieval[10]and predefined semantic categorization[11], laying the
groundwork for future developments. A significant advancement came in 2014 with Self-Paced Reranking (SPaR) by Jiang et al.[12],
which applied a self-paced learning framework for reranking search results. The issue of zero-shot learning then gained prominence,
with Gan et al. in 2016 providing a novel approach that used external ontologies for action recognition solely based on action
names[13]. They extended their zero-shot learning paradigm in 2017 to include event recognition in consumer videos, automatically
selecting representative and reliable concepts for event queries using DECK (Discovering Event Composition Knowledge) from web
images[14]. As the field further matured, cross-modal methods employing joint-embedding spaces rose to prominence[15,8,16–19].
These models optimized for efficient indexing by creating a shared space between video and text, while hierarchical embeddings also
made a significant impact[20]. In recent times, two major themes have emerged. The first focuses on large-scale weakly supervised
pretraining[21–23], leveraging audio-visual data for weak supervision. The second hones in on multimodal integration[5–7,24],
which has shown remarkable gains in performance metrics[25]. Our current work engages with this latter, rapidly evolving theme
of multimodal integration, adding to the ongoing dialogue in this dynamically evolving field.
2.2. Text embeddings
The field of linguistic representation through the use of learned embeddings has seen extensive exploration and analysis. Such
representations, as highlighted by Mikolov et al. (2013)[26], Radford et al. (2018)[27], and Radford et al. (2019)[28], have been
incorporated into a lot of natural language processing (NLP) tasks. What’s noteworthy from past research is the realization that,
irrespective of the vastness of pretraining, refining or finetuning these embedding structures on the specific task they are intended
for can often enhance their efficacy. This perspective is supported by studies like those by Radford et al. (2018)[27]and Devlin et
al. (2019)[29]. Furthermore, there’s a growing consensus in the literature, underscored by Devlin et al. (2019)[29], that the more
extensive the model – particularly those models that integrate multiple attention mechanisms – the more optimal its performance.
Diving into a slightly different domain, Burns et al. (2019)[30]ventured into the interconnected realms of language and vision. They
presented a comprehensive analysis focusing on the significance of linguistic features in vision-oriented applications. Their research
also introduced a novel word embedding scheme, tailored specifically to cater to visual tasks. Drawing inspiration from these past
works, our current study embarks on two primary objectives. Initially, we delve into understanding the influence of various pretrained
linguistic embeddings on performance outcomes in the realm of text-to-video retrieval. Building on our findings, we subsequently
introduce a novel technique that capitalizes on the synergistic benefits of integrating multiple textual embeddings.
2.3. Knowledge distillation/privileged information
The purpose of knowledge distillation is to transfer knowledge from one model (teacher) to another model (student). This idea
was originally introduced in the context of decision tree simplification[33]and model compression[34], and later extended by[35]
who formalised this knowledge transfer as the temperature-parameterised process of knowledge distillation. The concept was further
generalised in the unifying framework of generalized distillation [36] for learning with privileged information [37] (via similarity
controland knowledge transfer [38]), together with knowledge distillation[35]. Our approach distills knowledge of the similarities
3

I.Croitoru,S.-V.Bogolin,M.Leordeanuetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104235
Fig.2.Theinfluenceofthetextembedding.Differenttextembeddingsarepresentedalongthex-axes:w2v[26],mt_grovle[30],openai-gpt[27],roberta[31],
albert[32], gpt2-large[28], gpt2-xl[28], gpt2-xl-F and gpt-J[2]along with their performance in the geometric mean of 𝑅1-𝑅5-𝑅10on five datasets. For each experi-
ment,wereportthemean(diamond)andstandarddeviation(errorbar)ofthreerandomlyseededruns.ThisstudyisperformedusingtheCEretrievalarchitecture[6]:
eachmodeldiffersonlyinitsuseofpre-trainedtextembeddingasitsinput.Weobserveasignificantvarianceinperformancewhenchangingthetextembedding,
bothacrossandwithindatasets.Thedifferenceinrankingsacrossdatasetssuggeststhepresenceofcomplementaryinformationamongdifferenttextembeddings.
Fig.3.Shareofcorrectlyretrievedsamplesbasedontheusedpre-trainedtextembeddingonMSR-VTT.Asitcanbeseen,eachembeddinghasaconsiderable
shareofsampleretrievedcorrectlyonlybyitself(intermsofR1leftandR5right),furtherjustifyingourapproach.Bestviewedincolour.
between video and text samples into the student and therefore represents a form of generalized distillation. While most knowledge
distillation methods train the student with the teacher’s outputs as targets, more recent methods propose different approaches[39–41].
Knowledge distillation has consistently aimed to transfer intricate insights from a comprehensive model, often termed the “teacher”,
to a more compact variant known as the “student”. Historically, most methodologies in this domain have guided the student model to
replicate the individual output activations exhibited by the teacher for distinct data samples. One notable contribution in this context
is by Park et al. [4]. Their approach, labelledrelational knowledge distillation (RKD), takes a unique turn. Instead of merely focusing
on individual data points, RKD emphasizes the transfer of mutual relations among data samples. By introducing distance-wise and
angle-wise distillation losses, it aims to reduce relational discrepancies, rather than just mirroring the teacher’s outputs. Their work,
particularly in the sphere of metric learning, has even allowed student models to exceed the performance of their teachers in certain
instances. However, our methodology introduces a specialized angle: we accentuate direct learning of the cross-modal similarity
matrix. This nuance sets our work apart, especially when navigating the challenges in cross-modal scenarios.
3. Motivation and intuition
Recently, [28]points out that even though language representation learning systems (such as[31,32,27]) are pre-trained on vast
amounts of data, they are still sensitive to slight changes in the data distribution and task specification. In this way, most systems can
be viewed as narrow experts rather than competent generalists.
Consequently, in Fig.2we investigate how the usage of different off-the-shelf pre-trained text embeddings affects retrieval per-
formance. We observe that there is significant variance both within and across datasets, suggesting that each embedding captures
different types of information. Our intuition is that this information comes from the diversity of architectures, pretraining datasets
and pretraining objectives, which differs across the text embeddings.
Next, we give details about the used text embeddings and summarise the key differences between them in relation to our findings.
Word2vec (w2v)[26]is a lightweight text embedding that is widely used for vision tasks[42–44]. Multi-task GrOVLE (mt_grovle)[30]
is an extension of w2v that is specifically designed for vision-language tasks (in our experiments, however, we find that it slightly
under-performs w2v). The fine-tuned transformer language model (openai-gpt)[27]embedding is trained on a book corpus containing
long stretches of contiguous text. We observe that it performs well on datasets that have longer text queries such as ActivityNet.
RoBERTa [31] and ALBERT [32] are based on the BERT architecture [29] and are trained on the same data which consists of
unpublished books and Wikipedia articles. RoBERTa [31] focuses on hyperparameter optimization and shows that greater model
capacity leads to better performance while ALBERT[32]proposes parameter-reduction techniques to reduce memory consumption
and increase training speed. In our experiments, we observe a high variation in performance when comparing the two. In contrast
to the other embeddings, gpt2[28]is trained on a crawled dataset that was designed to be as diverse as possible. We observe that
4

I.Croitoru,S.-V.Bogolin,M.Leordeanuetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104235
Fig.4.TeachTextteacher-student framework overview.Given a batch of input videos and queries in natural language during training, the student model, 𝑀
( thle ef t a) ga gn rd gt aea tec dh e mr am tro id cee sls 𝑇 1 t, … t, e𝑇 a𝑁 ch( eri rg sh tt h) e oa uc gh p tr ho ed u dc ise is li lm ati il oa nr i lt oy m at 𝑑ric ine s ( dv dis itu ia ol nis te od ta hs s q reu ta rir ee g ar li d los s) s. T h 𝑟e s Nim oti el a tr hi aty m boa tt hr i tx p er so td uu dc ee nd b ay d𝑀 tei as e hn ec ro u inra gg ee sd tt ho m sa at mch
e o f h e r h t s s a e v . t h t n c s t e e
video embeddings (VE), but employ different text embeddings (TE𝑆for the student, TE1, … , TE𝑁for the teachers). At test time, the teacher models are discarded.
gpt2 performs most robustly in our experiments. However, it nevertheless exhibits a domain gap to each corpus (highlighted by the
fact that performance increases when fine-tuning gpt2-xl, termed gpt2-xl-F throughout the paper, on descriptions from text-video
retrieval datasets). Lastly, gpt-J[2]is the largest model in terms of parameters and is trained on vast amounts of textual data (825
GB).
In Fig. 3 we illustrate the number of correctly retrieved queries shared between three text embeddings on MSR-VTT: gpt2-xl,
gpt2-xl-F and w2v. We observe that only approximately 19% of queries are correctly retrieved by all three of the considered text
embeddings under the R1 (recall@1) metric (for recall@5, the corresponding number is 42%). The significant number of queries
uniquely retrieved by each text embedding suggests the presence of complementary information across embeddings.
4. Method
Motivated by the findings from Sec. 3, our work aims to study the influence of using multiple text embeddings for text-video
retrieval.
4.1. Problem description and learning setup
Let 𝐷={(𝑣 𝑖, 𝑐 𝑖)}𝑛 𝑖=1be a dataset of paired videos and captions. Following the multimodal expert approach of[5–7], for each video
we assume that we have access to a collection of video embeddings (sometimes referred to as “experts”) 𝑥 𝑖extracted from the various
modalities of video 𝑣 𝑖 using a pretrained video encoder (VE) in addition to a text embedding 𝑡 𝑖 (extracted using a text encoder, TE)
for each caption/query 𝑐 𝑖.2The objective of the text-video retrieval task is to learn a model 𝑀(𝑥 𝑖, 𝑡 𝑗)which assigns a high similarity
value to pairings (𝑥 𝑖, 𝑡 𝑗)of video and text embeddings that are in correspondence (i.e. 𝑖 =𝑗) and a low similarity otherwise. As is
common in the literature [45,5], we parameterise the model as a dual encoder that produces joint-embeddings in a shared space
such that they can be compared directly: 𝑀(𝑥 𝑖, 𝑡 𝑗) =𝐹(𝑥 𝑖)𝑇𝑄(𝑡 𝑗) ∈ℝwhere 𝐹 and 𝑄represent the learnt video and text encoder
respectively. To train the video and text encoder for the task of retrieval, we adopt a contrastive ranking loss[46]:
∑𝐵 ∑𝐵 [ ]
1
 𝑟= 𝑚𝑎𝑥(0,𝑠 𝑖𝑗−𝑠 𝑖𝑖+𝑚)+ 𝑚𝑎𝑥(0,𝑠 𝑗𝑖−𝑠 𝑖𝑖+𝑚) , (1)
𝐵
𝑖=1𝑗=1,𝑗≠𝑖
where 𝐵 represents the batch size used during training, 𝑠 𝑖𝑗=𝐹(𝑥 𝑖)𝑇𝑄(𝑡 𝑗)is the similarity score between the encoded video 𝐹(𝑥 𝑖)
and query 𝑄(𝑡 𝑗), and 𝑚is the margin.
The key idea behind our approach is to learn a retrieval model, 𝑀, that, in addition to the loss described above, also has access
to information provided by a collection of pre-trained “teacher” text-video retrieval models which are trained on the same task but
ingest different text embeddings. This is described next.
4.2. TeachText algorithm
To enhance the retrieval performance of model 𝑀, we propose theTeachTextalgorithm which seeks to exploit cues from multiple
text embeddings. An overview of our approach is provided in Fig.4. In the initial phase of the algorithm, we train a collection of
teacher models {𝑇 𝑘∶𝑘 ∈{1, … , 𝑁}}for the text-video retrieval task using the approach described in Sec.4.1. The teachers share the
same architecture, but each model 𝑇 𝑘 uses a different text embedding as input (extracted using a pre-trained text encoder TE𝑘). In
the second phase the parameters of the teachers are frozen. We then proceed by sampling a batch of 𝐵 pairs of videos and captions
and computing a corresponding similarity matrix 𝑆 𝑘∈ℝ𝐵×𝐵 for each teacher 𝑇 𝑘(Fig.4right). These 𝑁 similarity matrices are then
2 These embeddings are produced by models that have been trained on relevant tasks (such as action recognition for the video encoder and language modelling for
thetextencoder.).
5

I.Croitoru,S.-V.Bogolin,M.Leordeanuetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104235
combined with an aggregation function, Φ ∶ℝ𝑁×𝐵×𝐵→ℝ𝐵×𝐵 , to form a single supervisory similarity matrix (Fig.4, centre-right).
Concurrently, the batch of videos and captions are likewise processed by the student model, 𝑀, which produces a further similarity
matrix, 𝑆 𝑠∈ℝ𝐵×𝐵 . Finally, in addition to the standard retrieval loss (Eq.(1)), a distillation loss,  𝑑, encourages 𝑆 𝑠 to lie close to
the aggregate Φ(𝑆 1, … , 𝑆 𝑁). The algorithm is summarized in Algorithm1. During inference, the teacher models are discarded and
the student model 𝑀 requires only a single text embedding. Next, we give details of the distillation loss used to drive the similarity
matrix learning.
Algorithm 1TeachTextalgorithm.
1: Phase1:Learnteachermodels
2: Train 𝑁teacher models 𝑇 𝑘=(𝐹 𝑘, 𝑄 𝑘), 𝑘 ∈{1, … , 𝑁}using the training pairs (𝑥 𝑖, 𝑡𝑘 𝑗)where 𝑡𝑘 𝑗 represents the text modality used by teacher 𝑇 𝑘in a standard
retrievaltrainingsetup(Sec.4.1).
3: Phase 2:Learn the student model, 𝑀=(𝐹, 𝑄)
4: forminibatch of 𝐵paired samples {(𝑣 𝑖, 𝑐 𝑖)}do
5: For each pair (𝑣 𝑖, 𝑐 𝑖)extract video experts and text embedding pairs (𝑥 𝑖, 𝑡 𝑖)using VEand 𝑇𝐸 𝑆.
6: Compute student similarity matrix 𝑆 𝑠=[𝑠 𝑖𝑗]where 𝑠 𝑖𝑗=𝐹(𝑥 𝑖)𝑇𝑄(𝑡 𝑗)for 𝑖, 𝑗∈{1, … , 𝐵}
7: Compute the loss  𝑟via Eqn.(1)using 𝑆 𝑠.
8: forteacher 𝑇 𝑘, 𝑘 =1, … , 𝑁do
9: For each pair (𝑣 𝑖, 𝑐 𝑖)extract the video experts and text embedding pairs (𝑥 𝑖, 𝑡𝑘 𝑖)using 𝑉𝐸and 𝑇𝐸 𝑘.
10: Compute the similarity matrix 𝑆 𝑘=[𝑠𝑘 𝑖𝑗]where 𝑠𝑘 𝑖𝑗=𝐹 𝑘(𝑥 𝑖)𝑇𝑄 𝑘(𝑡𝑘 𝑖)for 𝑖, 𝑗∈{1, … , 𝐵}
11: endfor
1 12 4: C Uo pm dap tu et 𝑀e a thg weg ir te hg sa t re ad it ee nea tc sh cee oer m p𝑆a u𝑠t tr eix Φ rΦ( o𝑆 m(𝑆1 , … , c𝑆 𝑆𝑁 m𝑁) p.
1 3 : C o m p u t e l o s 𝑑 b t w n a n d 1 h, … , ) ov sii ta E loq sn s. (2 =).
: g d m d f t e o e  𝑟+ 𝑑.
15: endfor
4.3. Learning the similarity matrix
As noted in Sec.4.1, the essence of the retrieval task is to create a model that is able to establish cross-modal correspondences
between video and text/queries, assigning a high similarity value to a pairing in which a query accurately describes a video, and a
low similarity otherwise. This renders the similarity matrix a rich source of information about the knowledge held by the model. In
order to be able to transfer knowledge from the teachers to the student, we encourage the student to produce a similarity matrix that
matches an aggregate of those produced by the teachers. In this way, we convey information about the text and video correspondences
without strictly forcing the student to produce the same embeddings as the teachers. To this end, we define the similarity matrix
distillation loss as:
∑𝐵 ∑𝐵 [ ]
1
 𝑑= l((Φ(𝑆 1,…,𝑆 𝑁))𝑖𝑗,𝑠 𝑖𝑗) , (2)
𝐵
𝑖=1𝑗=1
where 𝐵 represents the batch size, 𝑁 the number of teachers, 𝑆 𝑘, 𝑘 =1 … 𝑁 the similarity matrix produced by teacher 𝑘,
Φ(𝑆 1, … , 𝑆 𝑁) represents the aggregation function of the teacher similarity matrices and 𝑠 𝑖𝑗 represents the student similarity be-
tween the samples 𝑖and 𝑗. Finally, inspired by prior distillation work[4], we implement las a Huber loss defined as follows:
{
1(𝑥−𝑦)2 if|𝑥−𝑦|≤1,
l(𝑥,𝑦)= 2 . (3)
|𝑥−𝑦|−1 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒
2
∑
We explored several forms of aggregation function and found that a simple element-wise mean, Φ(𝑆 1, … , 𝑆 𝑁) = 𝑁1 𝑁 𝑘=1𝑆 𝑘,
worked well in practice.
The idea of learning directly the cross-modal similarity matrix is, to the best of our knowledge, novel. It draws inspiration from the
work of relational knowledge distillation[4]which considered the idea of learning from relationships and introduced two algorithms
to implement this concept in a uni-modal setting through pairwise and triplet distance sampling. We compare our matrix learning
approach with theirs in Sec.5.
4.4. Student model
A key advantage of our approach is that it is agnostic to the architectural form of the student and teachers, and thus the student
(and teachers) can employ any method from the current literature. We test ourTeachTextalgorithm using three different recent
works MoEE[5], CE[6], MMT[7]as the student and teacher base architectures. All these works employ multimodal video encoders
for the text-video retrieval task. For more details, please consult the original paper of each method.
Establishing a stronger baseline: CE+, CE-L and CE-J.In our exploration beyond the initial models, we studied the efficacy of our approach
on an enhanced model. This model is built upon the CE architecture from[6], but incorporates several technical improvements. Our
goal was to create a stronger baseline for evaluating theTeachTextalgorithm. Our refinements began with the input embedding
selection. From our investigations, we found that certain video modalities, specifically face and OCR as used by[6], did not consistently
offer performance benefits. As a result, we decided to exclude them from the video encoder’s inputs. Additionally, we revisited the
6

I.Croitoru,S.-V.Bogolin,M.Leordeanuetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104235
Fig.5.(a)Baselineimprovements.They-axes(scaledforclarity)denoteretrievalperformanceonMSR-VTT.Webeginbypresentingtheperformanceoftheoriginal
CEmodel[6].Firstly,wecorrectcompressionartefactsinthepre-processingusedforembeddingextraction(CEHQ).Secondly,werefinetheusedvideomodalities
andtextmodalities(ModrefandTextref).Finally,wefinetunethetextembedding(F)andchangetheoptimizertoAdam[51],thusobtainingtheCE+baseline.(b)
Useofadditionaltextembeddingsatinferencetime.Allexperimentswereperformedwiththesamearchitecture[6],butwithdifferenttextembeddings:gpt2-xl
(firstbullet),gpt2-xl-F(secondbullet),theconcatenationofgpt2-xlandgpt2-xl-F(thirdbullet),themeanofgpt2-xlandgpt2-xl-F(fourthbullet)andusingTeachText
(lastbullet).Byusingmultipletextembeddingsattesttime,whichintroducesanoverhead,aboostinperformanceisobtained.However,byusingTeachTextthere
isnoadditionaloverheadattesttimeandtheperformanceissuperior.
expert selection outlined by [6]. Instead of using the Action(IG) from the I3D model [47], we opted for an R2P1D model [48].
This model, which aligns with the Action(IG) architecture, was first trained on IG-65m [49] and later fine-tuned on the Kinetics
dataset[47]. Further enhancing the model, we integrated the gpt2-xl text embedding from [28]. Following insights from [7], we
fine-tuned this embedding using captions from our target dataset, leading to noticeable improvements. One of our main contributions
is the introduction of the CE+ model. It includes all the changes we’ve discussed, and its performance is studied in Sec. 5.5 and
Fig.5a. This CE+ model serves as an advanced baseline in our study. We also introduce two additional variants: CE-L and CE-J. CE-L
aims to be efficient with fewer trainable parameters but still delivers competitive performance, using w2v for text embedding. In
contrast, CE-J is designed for superior performance and employs the robust gpt-jtext embedding. In summary, our work spans several
base architectures for the student model, referencing works like[5–7], and importantly introduces the CE+, CE-L, and CE-J models.
4.5. Teacher models
The teacher models use the same architecture as the student model. Concretely, for each of the four base architectures described
in Sec. 4.4, we create a pool of multiple teachers, each using a different pretrained text embedding as input. The candidate text
embeddings we consider in this work are mt_grovle[30], openai-gpt[27], gpt2-large[28], gpt2-xl[28], w2v[26]. In this way, we
obtain a set of up to five models that form the teachers 𝑇 𝑘, 𝑘 =1..5 used by TeachText. In addition to results reported in our
conference paper[1], we extend the embedding studies to incorporate gpt-J[2].
4.6. Training and implementation details
To effectively train our final student model, we synergistically combine the retrieval loss with the proposed distillation loss,
represented as  = 𝑟+ 𝑑. Our CE+ models have been trained using Pytorch[50], leveraging the capabilities of the Adam opti-
mizer[51]. We’ve set the learning rate at 0.001 and applied a weight decay of 1E-5. When an alternative base architecture, other
than our proposed CE+, is utilized, we ensure the adoption of the same hyper-parameters specified in the public codebase for the
respective method, whether it’s CE3or MMT.4For the MoEE model, we rely on the reimplementation provided by the original authors
of the CE method[6]. Importantly,TeachTextdoes not introduce any new trainable parameters or modalities to the final model.
When employingTeachTextfor training, only the added loss term  𝑑 is integrated, while all other hyper-parameters are retained
without modification.TeachTexthas no inference overhead. However, during training, multiple teacher models are required with
a total maximum training time varying from 45 minutes up to 14h depending on the dataset.
5. Experimental setup
5.1. Datasets description
To provide an extensive comparison we test our approach on seven video datasets that have been explored in recent works as
benchmarks for the task of text-video retrieval. We follow the same experimental setup as prior works [6,7,20,24]. Next, we give
details about all the datasets used.
3 https://github .com /albanie /collaborative -experts.
4 https://github .com /gabeur /mmt.
7

I.Croitoru,S.-V.Bogolin,M.Leordeanuetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104235
MSRVTT [52] contains 10k videos, each having 20 captions. In order to test the retrieval performance, we report results on the
official split which contains 2990 videos for the test split and 497 for validation, following the setup used in[6]. We perform most
of our ablations on this split. To enable comparison with as many other methods as possible, we also report results on the 1k-A split
as used in[6,7,24]. For this split, we report the performance after training 100 epochs. The split contains 1000 video candidates for
testing and 9000 for training. We use the same candidates as defined in[6]which are used by other works[18,7,24].
MSVD[53]contains 80k English descriptions for a total of 1970 videos. We use the standard split of 1200 (training), 100 (validation)
and 670 (testing) as used in other works[54,8,6]. The videos fromMSVDdo not have audio streams.
DiDeMo[55]contains 10464 videos sourced from a large-scale creative commons collection[56]and features moments of unedited,
diverse content (concerts, sports, pets etc.). The dataset comprises 3-5 pairs of descriptions per video. We adopt the paragraph-video
retrieval protocols used by[57,6]and use splits corresponding to 8392 train, 1065 validation and 1004 test videos.
LSMDC[58]contains 118081 short video clips extracted from 202 movies. Each clip is described by a caption that is either extracted
from the movie script or from transcribed DVS (descriptive video services) for the visually impaired. There are 7408 clips in the
validation set and the testing is performed on 1000 videos from movies that are disjoint from the training and val sets as described
in the Large Scale Movie Description Challenge (LSMDC).5
ActivityNet [59] contains 20k videos extracted from YouTube and has around 100K descriptive sentences. We follow the same
paragraph-video retrieval setup as used in prior works[57,6]and report results on theval1split: we use 10009 videos for training
and 4917 videos for testing.
VaTeX [60] contains 34911 videos with multilingual captions (Chinese and English). There are 10 captions per video for each
language. We follow the same protocol as in[20,24]and split the validation set equally (1500 validation and 1500 testing videos).
In this work, we only use the English annotations.
QuerYD[61]contains 1815 videos in the training split and 388 and 390 for validation and testing. The videos are sourced from
YouTube and cover a diverse range of visual content. The dataset contains 31441 descriptions, from which 13019 are precisely
localized in the video content (with start time and end time annotations) and the other 18422 are coarsely localized. For this work,
we do not use the localization annotations and report results for the official splits.
Condensed Movies[3]is a large scale dataset containing clips from movies annotated with detailed captions. It has around 30k
captioned video clips extracted from around 3k movies. In order to enable future comparisons, we report results on the validation
split (2200 clips) used for the CMD-Challenge6while we use the training split (31k clips) for training.
5.2. Metrics
To assess performance, we follow prior work (e.g.[16,5,17,18,21,6,7]) and report standard retrieval metrics. These include R@K
(recall at rank K, where higher is better) and MdR (median rank where lower is better). To maintain concision, for certain analyses
we report the geometric mean of R@1, R@5, and R@10 rather than individual metrics (this statistic aims to be representative of
overall retrieval performance). The numbers are reported for the task of retrieving a video given text queriest2vas well as for the
opposite taskv2t. For each experiment, we report the mean and standard deviation of three randomly seeded runs.
5.3. Video embeddings (experts) description
In this work, we used the set of pretrained experts considered by the authors of[6]. For completeness, we summarise below the
manner in which these experts were extracted.
Two form of action experts are used: Action(KN)and Action(IG). The former is an I3D architecture trained on Kinetics[47], which
produces 1024-dimensional embeddings from frame clips extracted at 25fps and centrecropped to 224 pixels. The Action(IG)model
is a 34-layer R(2+1)D model[48]that has ben trained on IG-65m[49]: it operates on frames extracted at 30 fps in clips of 8 at 112
×112 pixel resolution.
Two forms of object experts are used, named Obj(IN)and Obj(IG). They are produced from frame-level embeddings extracted at 25fps.
The Obj(IN)model consists of an SENet-154 backbone[62]which has been trained on ImageNet for image classification. Obj(IG)is
formed from a ResNext-101[63]extractor which was trained on weakly labelled Instagram data[64]. For both models, frames are
resized to 224×224 pixels.
The audio expert is produced using the VGGish model[65], trained for audio classification on the YouTube-8m dataset.
The scene expert is an embedding that is extracted at 25 fps from a centrecrop of 224×224 pixels. The model, which is pretrained
on Places365[66], uses a DenseNet-161[67]architecture.
The speech expert is produced using the Google Cloud API (to transcribe the speech content).
5.4. Text embeddings description
We use several text embeddings as follows:
5 https://sites .google .com /site /describingmovies /previous -years /lsmdc -2019.
6 https://www .robots .ox .ac .uk /~vgg /research /condensed -movies /challenge .html.
8

I.Croitoru,S.-V.Bogolin,M.Leordeanuetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104235
Fig.6.(a)Teacherstudy.WeshowtheinfluenceoflearningfromdifferentnumberofteachersontheMSR-VTTdataset(allstudentssharethesameCE+model,
y-axesscaledforclarity).Theteacherswereaddedinthefollowingorder:gpt2-xl,w2v,gpt2-xl-F,mt_grovle,openai-gpt,gpt2-large.Theperformanceofthecombined
teachersgrowsasmoreteachersareadded,howeveritreachesaplateauafterthefirst3teachers.Thetrendissimilarforstudentperformance.(b)Performancevs
teachertype.Westudytheinfluenceofteacherswithdifferenttextembeddingsatinput:w2vandgpt2-xl.Thefirstpointrepresentstheperformanceofthestudent
withoutusingTeachText.Weobserveaboostinperformanceindependentofthenatureoftheteacher.
Table1
Methodgenerality.RetrievalperformanceonvariousdatasetswhenapplyingTeachTextontopofdifferentbasemodels.InstancesinwhichTeachTextbringsan
improvementoverthebasearchitecturearehighlightedinbold.WeobservethatTeachTextyieldsaconsistentboostinperformanceregardlessofbasearchitecture.
MSRVTT MSRVTT1k-A MSVD DiDeMo LSMDC ActivityNet
Model
Base TeachText Base TeachText Base TeachText Base TeachText Base TeachText Base TeachText
MoEE 24.4 ±0.1 𝟐𝟓.𝟖 ±0.1 41.6 ±0.4 𝟒𝟑.𝟒 ±0.6 41.8 ±0.3 𝟒𝟑.𝟐 ±0.5 33.2 ±1.4 𝟒𝟎.𝟐 ±0.7 23.8 ±0.4 𝟐𝟔.𝟎 ±0.5 40.1 ±0.3 𝟒𝟓.𝟐 ±0.1
CE 24.4 ±0.1 𝟐𝟓.𝟗 ±0.1 42.0 ±0.8 𝟒𝟑.𝟖 ±0.3 42.3 ±0.6 𝟒𝟐.𝟔 ±0.4 34.2 ±0.4 𝟑𝟗.𝟓 ±0.5 23.7 ±0.3 𝟐𝟓.𝟓 ±0.5 40.4 ±0.3 𝟒𝟓.𝟎 ±0.6
MMT - - 44.7 ±0.4 𝟒𝟓.𝟔 ±0.7 - - - - 24.6 ±0.7 𝟐𝟓.𝟗 ±0.6 44.0 ±0.4 𝟒𝟕.𝟗 ±0.4
CE+ 29.2 ±0.2 𝟑𝟎.𝟒 ±0.0 50.3 ±0.2 𝟓𝟎.𝟗 ±0.4 46.5 ±1.0 𝟒𝟔.𝟔 ±0.5 35.8 ±0.4 𝟒𝟎.𝟒 ±0.4 28.1 ±0.3 𝟑𝟎.𝟕 ±0.3 39.7 ±0.0 𝟒𝟔.𝟑 ±0.2
CE-L 25.5 ±0.1 𝟐𝟔.𝟗 ±0.1 45.7 ±0.2 𝟒𝟔.𝟓 ±0.8 41.3 ±0.5 𝟒𝟐.𝟔 ±0.7 36.4 ±0.5 𝟒𝟏.𝟓 ±0.4 24.1 ±0.2 𝟐𝟓.𝟗 ±0.3 39.6 ±0.5 𝟒𝟓.𝟕 ±0.2
mt_grovle[30]is a “vision-sensitive” language embedding which is adapted from w2v using WordNet and an original vision-language
graph built from Visual Genome[68]. The size of the final pre-trained embedding is 300.
OpenAI-GPT [27] is a pre-trained text embedding which uses transformers [69] and language modelling on a large corpus (the
Toronto Book Corpus) (the final model has 110M params). The size of the final pre-trained embedding is 768.
RoBERTa[31]is a BERT-based embedding[29]. The model is trained longer with bigger batch size on more data, having 125M
params. The size of the final pre-trained embedding is 768.
ALBERT[32]is a lightweight modification to BERT[29]which overcomes some memory limitations, having 11M params. The size
of the final pre-trained embedding is 768.
GPT2-large[28]is a transformer-based[69]model trained on even more data (40 Gb of text) without any supervision, having 774M
params. The size of the final pre-trained embedding is 1280.
GPT2-xl[28]is similar to GPT2-large, but has more parameters (1558M params). The size of the final pre-trained embedding is 1600.
W2V[26]is one of the most popular text embeddings used in vision tasks. It uses a neural network model to learn word representa-
tions. The size of the final pre-trained embedding is 300.
GPT-J[2]is a new powerful text embedding released recently. It has around 6B learnable parameters and is trained on 825Gb of
textual data. The size of the final pre-trained embedding is 50400 and we use PCA to reduce the dimensionality to 2048.
5.5. Ablations
In this section we present an extensive study of our proposed approach. Following the setup used in prior works[6,7]we conduct
ablations on theMSR-VTTdataset[52], except where otherwise stated.
Baseline improvements. We propose CE+ as an additional baseline which consists of a series of technical improvements to the
model of [6]. As seen in Fig.5a each modification described in Sec.4.4brings additional gain over the base architecture. We observe
in particular that finetuning the text embedding on the target dataset has a high influence, further highlighting the critical role played
by text embeddings and justifying their study. In addition to other changes we found that certain video embedding expert features
were highly sensitive to jpeg compression choices used in video pre-processing. To address this, we re-extracted features from video
frames densely extracted with minimal jpeg compression (corresponding to the use of ffmpeg[70]and the-qscale:v 2flag). In
order to be fair in our comparisons, we apply this correction everywhere. For a fair comparison, we re-train MoEE[5]and CE[6].
In Sec.5.11we report the results of re-training the methods[5,6]using these embeddings extracted with the updated pre-processing
which yields a higher performance than reported in the original papers.
9

I.Croitoru,S.-V.Bogolin,M.Leordeanuetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104235
Fig.7.(b)Distillationtype.Presentingvariousalternativesfordistillingtheinformationfromtheteacher:Embdregresswhichisaclassicalapproachwherethe
queryandvideojointembeddingsaredirectlyregressedbasedontheembeddingsgivenbytheteacher,Relationaldistillation[4]whichpreservesintra-textand
intra-videorelationships,pairwisedistancedistillation(Pdist-adapting[4]forcrossmodalrelationships),rankingdistillationinspiredby[71]atRank1andRank
10andTeachText.Thefirstbulletrepresentsthestudentwithoutdistillation.(b)Similaritymatrixaggregation.Wepresentacomparisonofdifferentsimilarity
matrixaggregation:min,maxandaverage.Ascanbeseen,theaverageaggregationhasthebestresults(bothwhenevaluatingtheteacherstandaloneorinconjunction
withourTeachTextalgorithm).
Fig.8.(a)Batchsizevariation.WevarythebatchsizefortheMSR-VTTdatasettoseehowthisaffectstheperformance.Weobservethatbatchsizeinfluences
performance.TheunderlyingarchitectureusedforthisexperimentisCE+.(b)Lossstudy.Inthispicture,weshowhowvariousdistillationlosses(L1,L2,Huber)
affecttheperformance.
Additionally for the DiDeMo [55] dataset we observed that prior work [6] uses the whole clip to pre-extract the features while
the captions describe only the first 30 seconds as described in[55]. We address this by employing only the pre-extracted features
corresponding to the first 30 seconds of video.
Using multiple text embeddings during inference. TeachText makes no use of additional information at test time. However,
it is natural to ask whether the additional text embeddings can be trivially included as part of the model architecture. In Fig.5(b)
we compare our approach with some relatively simple text embedding aggregation techniques, which require access to multiple
text embeddings during both training and inference. We observe thatTeachTextoutperforms these aggregation techniques such as
direct concatenation or mean of the text embeddings, suggesting that the proposed method is effective in capturing the additional
information given by multiple text embeddings. Moreover, the text encoder of existing systems[5–7]typically employs many param-
eters, so adding multiple text embeddings to the architecture adds a significant number of parameters (100M+). For example, the
concatenation of two text embeddings (provided that they have the same size) almost doubles the total number of parameters for
CE+ (approx 240M learnable parameters, yielding total model sizes of 503.98M vs 262.73M for CE+). In contrast, when employing
TeachText, no parameters are added.
Teacher variation.The teacher models share the same architecture with the student, but use a different text embedding. We next
conduct an ablation on the influence of the number of used teachers. We observe in Fig. 6a that performance increases with the
addition of more teachers. However, since the combined performance of the teachers after adding more than 3 remains similar, we
do not obtain further improvement. Thus, for our final experiments presented in Sec.5.11we use a combination of three teachers.
The text embeddings corresponding to these three teachers are: w2v[26], gpt2-xl[28]and gpt2-xl-F (gpt2-xl finetuned on the cap-
tions from the target dataset). Moreover, in Fig.6b, we study how changing the embedding used by the teacher model affects the
final performance. We observe that even though the model ingesting w2v embeddings has a significantly lower performance than
the student model without usingTeachText, there is a significant gain when learning from the teacher which uses w2v. This again
10

I.Croitoru,S.-V.Bogolin,M.Leordeanuetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104235
indicates that there is additional information captured by using a different text embedding which can be exploited byTeachText.
Distillation ablation. We compare the proposed learning of the similarity matrix with other distillation alternatives. As seen in
Fig.7a, our proposed approach is effective in capturing the relationships between video and text. Firstly, we test our approach against
a more classical distillation setup, that does not follow the idea of relational distillation, where we directly regress the embeddings
given by the teacher (Embd regress). Next, we provide comparisons betweenTeachTextand several other possible instantiations of
relational distillation[4]. Indeed, given the highly general nature of[4],TeachTextcan be interpreted within this framework as
a particular relational configuration that employs cross-modal distillation through batches of similarity matrices. Since the original
work of[4]considered single-modality applications, we explore two variations of[4]as baselines for the text-video retrieval task.
The first one (Relational), preserves the same intra-text and intra-video relationships independently. We use the same cost function
as in[4]and enforce it on both video and text embeddings. The second approach (Pdist), uses the cross modal pairwise distances as
a relation measure between text and video as opposed to the similarity matrix. While these methods indeed bring a gain, we observe
thatTeachTextis most effective.
We also provide a baseline inspired by the work of[71]that highlighted the benefits of considering only the top K predictions
given by the teacher. To do so, we match the similarities supplied byTeachTextonly for the top K ranks given by the teacher rather
than for the whole mini-batch. We show the performance for K=1 and K=10 (Rank 1and Rank 10presented in Fig.7b). Restricting
to only the top K predictions when distilling the similarity matrix results in a slight drop in performance.
Method generality.To demonstrate the generality of TeachText, we test it on three strong methods[5–7]in addition to the pro-
posed CE+ baseline. In Table1we observe a consistent gain in performance, independent of the base architecture. Moreover, a gain
is achieved across all datasets tested, having over 5% absolute gain on DiDeMoand ActivityNet datasets for MoEE, CE and CE+
models. Note that for MMT[7]we report results on the datasets included in the public implementation provided by the authors.7
We also introduce a new CE-L base architecture. This is similar to the CE[6]and CE+, but usesw2vas the text embedding, greatly
reducing the number of architectural parameters. In Table1, we observe that our methodTeachTextis effective even when using
this lightweight architecture. This architecture also has the lowest number of parameters when compared to prior works as can be
seen in Table6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13.
Similarity matrix aggregation study.In Fig.7b we present several similarity matrix aggregation strategies: min, maxand average.
We observe that using the mean of the similarity matrices is most effective. Because of this, we use the mean as the final aggregation
technique in ourTeachTextalgorithm.
Batch size variation.In Fig.8a we vary the batch size during training on theMSR-VTTdataset to investigate its influence on per-
formance. We observe that we obtain the best result using the same batch size as for the method without applying theTeachText
algorithm (64 in this case).
Loss study.In addition to the Huber loss (also employed by[4]), we compare against L1 and L2 losses. As observed in Fig.8b, the
Huber loss performs better than L1 loss and slightly better than L2.
Quantity of training data vs performance.We next study how training data quantity influences the proposed method. In Fig.9a
we observe that by using theTeachTextwith increasing quantities of data, the performance gap increases, suggesting that its benefit
may prove to be more useful in larger scale dataset scenarios.
Distillation loss weight vs performance.Our final loss is the sum of the distillation loss  𝑑 and the retrieval loss  𝑟as described
in Algorithm1. In this ablation study, we investigate the influence of varying the weight of each loss. We explore variants of the
distillation loss weight as follows  =𝛼∗ 𝑑+(1 −𝛼) ∗ 𝑟, for different values of 𝛼∈[0.1, 1]. In Fig.9b, we observe the best results
if the two losses have equal weight.
Mixture of architectures.In all experiments so far, the only model difference between the teacher and the student has been the
pre-trained text embedding fed to the model. However, our method is not limited to this constraint. In this ablation, we investigate
the influence of using teachers with different underlying architectures. Our preliminary results shown in Fig.10a indicate that using
a mixture of architectures as teachers brings limited gains. This suggests that, in contrast to using different text embeddings, archi-
tectural changes introduce limited diversity into the teacher mixture.
Joint embedding size variation.As presented in Sec.4, the student model learns a joint embedding between text and video. In this
experiment, we vary the dimensionality of this embedding. In Fig.10b, we observe that the embedding size has a slight influence on
performance. The best results are obtained using an embedding size of 768 which we use in all the experiments.
Computational costWhileTeachTextdoes not incur any computational cost during inference, for training we need to train multiple
teacher models. Depending on the dataset, the training time of a model varies between 15 minutes to 4.5 hours on one Nvidia P40
GPU. In Table2we present an analysis with the required training time along with the number of parameters for the teacher models.
For the final model TT-CE+ we are using three teachers, so the total training time of the teacher varies between 45 minutes to 14h,
depending on the dataset. Please note that the teachers can be trained in parallel.
5.6. Increasing text embedding capacity
In this experiment, we investigate the use of the recently released GPT-J[2]model, a powerful text embedding trained on large
volumes of text data. This model uses a particularly large embedding dimensionality (50,400), so we employ PCA on every dataset,
7 https://github .com /gabeur /mmt.
11

I.Croitoru,S.-V.Bogolin,M.Leordeanuetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104235
Table2
Trainingtime.Analysisforthetrainingtimefortheteachersbasedon
thedataset.
Model Dataset Params AvgTeachertrainingtime
TT-CE+ MSR-VTT 262M 3x55.3𝑚
TT-CE+ MSVD 87M 3x71.8𝑚
TT-CE+ DiDeMo 99M 3x15.4𝑚
TT-CE+ LSMDC 388M 3x80.5𝑚
TT-CE+ Activity-Net 376M 3x271.8𝑚
Fig.9.(a)Amountoftrainingdatavsperformance.WeobservethattherateofimprovementinducedbyTeachTextincreasesastrainingdataincreases.(b)
Distillation loss weight vs performance.We obtain the best performance if the distillation loss  𝑑and the retrieval loss  𝑟have the same weight.
Fig.10.(a)Mixtureofarchitectures.Weperformpreliminaryexperimentstoexplorewhetherourmethodbenefitsfromlearningfromteachersthatdonotshare
thesamearchitecture.Thexaxiscorrespondstothemodelswhichareusedasteachers.Incaseslabelledwith3texteach,weusedthreedifferentvariationsof
eacharchitectureasteachers,accountingforatotalnumberofno.methods*3teachers.Weobservelimitedbenefitinusingmultiplearchitecturesasteachers.(b)
Joint-Embeddingsizevariation.WevarythesizeoftheunderlyingjointembeddingusedbythestudentmodelandapplyTeachTextit.Weobtainthebestresults
usinga768dimensionalembedding.
using the training split, to reduce its dimensionality to 2,048. We observe that GPT-J yields performance gains, as shown in Ta-
ble6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13(note that the model termed TT-CE-J uses GPT-J as text embedding).
5.7. Method application -denoising
One immediate application of our method is data denoising. Existing real-world text-video datasets for the retrieval task suffer
from label noise which can harm training. More concretely, in crowd-sourced datasets such asMSR-VTTthere are some captions that
are highly ambiguous/generic (e.g.“A tutorial is presented”, “Clip showing different colours”, “A man is writing”) and can describe
multiple videos from the dataset. We therefore propose to use TeachTextteachers to filter out such cases. For this scenario, we
simply remove low-ranked predictions given by teachers and retrain the student using only the new samples. Specifically, we remove
all sentences for which the correct video is not ranked in the top 40 results from the training set. This method is best-suited for
datasets where multiple captions per video are available, ensuring that we can remove noisy captions without removing the video
itself from training. We apply the denoising method on theMSR-VTTandMSVDdatasets (which have multiple captions per video)
with the CE+ model. As seen in Fig.11a, this can be an effective way of further improving the results. This process can be applied
to either the student or the teacher and in each case it brings an improvement as shown in Fig.11a. Note that denoising is not used
in other ablations unless otherwise specified.
In Fig.11b we vary the threshold used to filter out sentences from the training set, where we observe that denoising brings a boost
in performance. We also observe that the best filtering threshold forMSR-VTTis rank 40. This method turns out to be effective in
12

I.Croitoru,S.-V.Bogolin,M.Leordeanuetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104235
Fig.11.(a)Denoising.WeobservedinpreliminarystudiesthatsomeofthecaptionsavailableinMSR-VTTandMSVDarenoisyandmayactivelyharmthetraining
process.Here,wepresenttheeffectofdenoisingonretrievalperformanceonMSR-VTT(y-axesscaledforclarity).WedenotebySthecasesinwhichthestudentwas
trainedusingdenoisingandbyTthecasesinwhichtheteachersweretrainedusingdenoising.Weestimatethedegreeofnoisepresentinacaptionbylookingatthe
teacherrankanddropthecaptionifnecessary.Weobservetheeffectivenessofdenoisingwhenappliedinisolation(CE+vsCE+Denoise)andinconjunctionwith
thefullTeachTextmethod.Moreover,weobservethatthemethodincreasesinefficiencyifwedenoiseboththestudentandtheteacher(TEACHTEXTDenoiseT+S).
(b)Rankvariationfordenoising.Thedenoisinginvolvesdroppingcaptionsthatareassignedalowrankingbytheteacherforthetrainingset.Inthisexperiment,
wevarytherankbelowwhichwedropsentences.Pleasenotethatforarankof5(onthetrainingset)theamountofdroppedsentencesisapproximately46%.Note
thatMSR-VTThas20captionspervideo,soafterapplyingthisfilterwekeeponaverage10captionspervideo.
Table3
Denoising-keptvsremovedqueriescomparison.
Inordertoseeifthereareanydifferences,wecom-
putethelengthandthespecificityscore[72]forthe
sentenceskeptandremovedinthedenoisingprocess.
Asitcanbeseen,theremovedqueriesareshorterand
lessspecific.
Average Keptqueries Removedqueries
Length 9.39 6.98
Specificity 0.37 0.32
Fig.12.(a)TeachVideo-Extensiontovideosidemodalities.Weobservethatourmethodcanbeeffectiveintakingadvantageoftheadditionalinformation
broughtbyusingmultiplevideosidemodalities,withoutincurringcomputationaloverheadattesttime.(b)TeachVideo-Modalitystudy.Inthisfigurewestudyif
thenatureoftheremovedmodalityaffectstheperformance.Weobservethatifweremovetheaudiomodalityfromthestudentthereisasignificantlossinperformance
and,whileTeachVideobringsanimprovement,theaudiomodalitycannotbedistilledentirely.Ontheotherhand,byemployingTeachVideowecanremovethe
Action(KN)fromthestudentwithoutobservingadropinperformance.
reducing noise for retrieval datasets. Our final results when comparing with prior methods are presented using denoising onMSR-VTT
andMSVDdatasets. ForMSVDdataset we use rank 100 as a filtering threshold.
5.8. TeachVideo -extension to video modalities
While the focus of this work is the use of multiple text embeddings, it is natural to consider whether this approach can be
extended to video encoder modalities. Thus, we introduce theTeachVideoalgorithm which follows the same setup as the original
TeachText, but now the teacher has access to multiple video modalities instead of multiple text modalities. In this study, all students
and all teachers use the same text embedding to assess the gains due to TeachVideo. By employing TeachVideo we retain the
computational advantage of requiring fewer video modalities during inference. The experiments presented in Fig.12a suggest that
TeachVideo can bring a boost over the original student. We believe this extension may be useful in scenarios in which limited
computational resources are available during inference. We also study whether the selection of specific types of modalities affects
13

I.Croitoru,S.-V.Bogolin,M.Leordeanuetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104235
Fig.13.(a)Performancevsquerylength.WepresenttheperformancevsquerylengthfortheMSR-VTTdataset.Asitcanbeseen,thereisaclearcorrelation
betweentheperformanceandthequerylength.(b)ShareofcorrectlyretrievedsamplesintermsofR1whenusingTeachTextontheMSR-VTTtestset.We
showthecasewherewelearnfrom3teachers.WecanseethatthemodelwithTeachText,preservesmostoftheknowledgefromthestudentwithoutTeachText,
butalsoacquiresnewinformationfromtheteacher(yellowarea).Bestviewedincolour.
Table4
MSR-VTTfullsplit-TeachVideocomparisonwithothermethods.Asitcanbeseen,ifweremoveavideomodalityfromtheCE+model,theperformancedrops
(CE+(w/oAudio)andCE+(w/oAction).However,ifweemployTeachVideo,wecanregainsomeoftheperformance,evenwithoutusingthatmodalityduring
inference.
Model VTPT Task 𝑅@1↑ 𝑅@5↑ 𝑅@10↑ 𝑀𝑑𝑅↓ Task 𝑅@1↑ 𝑅@5↑ 𝑅@10↑ 𝑀𝑑𝑅↓ Params
QB-Norm[73] ✓ t2v 29.6 54.5 65.3 4.0 v2t − − − − −
CLIP2Video[74] ✓ t2v 29.8 55.5 66.2 4.0 v2t 54.6 82.1 90.8 1.0 −
Dual[75] ✗ t2v 7.7 22.0 31.8 32.0 v2t 13.0 30.8 43.3 15.0 −
HGR[20] ✗ t2v 9.2 26.2 36.5 24.0 v2t 15.0 36.7 48.8 11.0 −
MoEE[5] ✗ t2v 11.1 ±0.1 30.7 ±0.1 42.9 ±0.1 15.0 ±0.0 v2t 16.5 ±0.1 43.1 ±0.5 57.3 ±0.6 7.7 ±0.5 400.41𝑀
CE[6] ✗ t2v 11.0 ±0.0 30.8 ±0.1 43.3 ±0.3 15.0 ±0.0 v2t 17.0 ±0.5 43.5 ±0.4 57.8 ±0.5 7.2 ±0.2 183.45𝑀
QB-Norm[73] ✗ t2v 17.3 ±0.0 42.1 ±0.1 54.9 ±0.1 8.0 ±0.0 v2t − − − − 262.73𝑀
Teacher(CE+) ✗ t2v 13.7 ±0.3 36.4 ±0.5 48.3 ±0.5 11.0 ±0.0 v2t 22.0 ±0.6 50.8 ±1.1 64.5 ±1.1 5.3 ±0.6 262.73𝑀
CE+(w/oAudio) ✗ t2v 12.4 ±0.2 33.6 ±0.6 46.3 ±0.6 12.7 ±0.6 v2t 19.6 ±0.7 46.3 ±1.0 60.2 ±0.9 6.5 ±0.5 226.3𝑀
TV-CE+(w/oAudio) ✗ t2v 12.8 ±0.1 34.3 ±0.1 47.0 ±0.1 12.0 ±0.0 v2t 21.1 ±0.5 49.6 ±0.9 62.8 ±1.0 5.8 ±0.3 226.3𝑀
CE+(w/oAction) ✗ t2v 13.5 ±0.1 36.0 ±0.1 48.8 ±0.1 11.0 ±0.0 v2t 21.7 ±0.7 51.4 ±1.1 65.1 ±0.6 5.0 ±0.0 226.69𝑀
TV-CE+(w/oAction) ✗ t2v 14.0 ±0.0 36.6 ±0.1 49.6 ±0.0 11.0 ±0.0 v2t 22.7 ±0.2 51.7 ±0.8 65.8 ±0.6 5.0 ±0.0 226.69𝑀
the effectiveness of distillation. In Fig.12b we observe that if we remove the audiomodality from the student, but retain it for the
teacher thenTeachVideoimproves the student but does not enable it to match the performance of the teacher. However, we find
that when repeating this procedure with Action(KN),TeachVideowe can successfully train a student that does not have access to
this modality but nevertheless has the same performance as if it were available. Thus, the benefits of TeachVideodepend on the
removed modality. Additionally, in Table4we present a comparison with other methods on the MSRVTT dataset. As it can be seen,
if the computational resources during inference are scarce,TeachVideocan be employed to reduce the computational cost, while
it may suffer from a slight decrease in performance. This computational cost reduction happens due to two factors: 1)TeachVideo
requires extracting fewer video modalities for inference (in this case 6 vs 7 in the teacher case) and 2) it has fewer parameters.
5.9. Error analysis
The purpose of this section is to better the limitations and characteristics of our retrieval system. We begin with a simple unimodal
analysis that investigates the influence of query length. As seen in Fig.13a, there is a positive correlation between query length and
performance, both with and without usingTeachText.
As part of our qualitative inspection of the queries removed during the denoising step (described in Sec.5.7), we observed that
many of the removed sentences are quite general in nature (e.g. “a man walks away”, “a video showing scenes from a movie”). This
motivated an investigation of differences in distribution between the pool of kept sentences and the pool of removed sentences. First,
as seen in Table3, we found that retained sentences tend to be longer. Second, we used the sentence specificity estimation method
of Ko et al.[72]to estimate a specificity score for each query. We found a small difference in the specificity score between removed
and retained queries. One consequence of this observation is that it may be possible to predict retrieval performance to some degree
for a given query by only inspecting the query itself.
Gains due to distillation.In Fig.13b we visualise the proportions of overlapping correctly retrieved samples in terms of R1 on the
test set of theMSR-VTTdataset for the teacher, the student, and the student withTeachText. We illustrate common retrievals when
distillation employs three teachers. We observe that theTeachTextmodel retains most of the knowledge of the student, but also
acquires additional information from the teacher.
14

I.Croitoru,S.-V.Bogolin,M.Leordeanuetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104235
Fig.14.Qualitativeresults.Wepresentthetop3videoretrievalsforeachquery,givenbytheTeachTextmethodusedontopofaCE+architecture.Moreover,
weshowtherankandsimilarityfortheteacher,aswellasforthestudentwithoutusingTeachTextforthegroundtruthvideo.Wemarkingreencaseswherethe
retrievaliscorrectintermsofR1andwithredcaseswhereisincorrect.Foreachofthecasesshown,themodellearnsfromtheteachertocorrectitsprediction.
Table5
CondensedMoviesDatasetvalidationsplitresults.Resultsarere-
portedforourbestsinglemodelinordertoenablefuturecomparisons.
*(pt)denotespretrainingonHowTo100M.
Model 𝑅@1↑ 𝑅@5↑ 𝑅@10↑ 𝑀𝑑𝑅↓
CMDbaseline[3] 3.44 10.29 15.7 -
MMCM[76](pt)* 5.8 ±0.2 15.8 ±0.2 22.4 ±0.1 73.7 ±1.7
CE+ 𝟕.𝟐 ±0.1 18.6 ±0.1 26.9 ±0.3 42.0 ±1.4
TT-CE+ 𝟕.𝟐 ±0.4 𝟏𝟗.𝟒 ±0.1 𝟐𝟕.𝟖 ±0.8 𝟑𝟖.𝟕 ±1.2
Table6
MSR-VTTfullsplit:Comparisontostateoftheart.VTPTmarkscaseswherelargescalevisual-textpretrainingwasused.Weshowinboldthebestperforming
modelwherenovisual-textpretrainingisused.
Model VTPT Task 𝑅@1↑ 𝑅@5↑ 𝑅@10↑ 𝑀𝑑𝑅↓ Task 𝑅@1↑ 𝑅@5↑ 𝑅@10↑ 𝑀𝑑𝑅↓ Params
QB-Norm[73] ✓ t2v 29.6 54.5 65.3 4.0 v2t − − − − −
CLIP2Video[74] ✓ t2v 29.8 55.5 66.2 4.0 v2t 54.6 82.1 90.8 1.0 −
Dual[75] ✗ t2v 7.7 22.0 31.8 32.0 v2t 13.0 30.8 43.3 15.0 −
HGR[20] ✗ t2v 9.2 26.2 36.5 24.0 v2t 15.0 36.7 48.8 11.0 −
MoEE[5] ✗ t2v 11.1 ±0.1 30.7 ±0.1 42.9 ±0.1 15.0 ±0.0 v2t 16.5 ±0.1 43.1 ±0.5 57.3 ±0.6 7.7 ±0.5 400.41𝑀
CE[6] ✗ t2v 11.0 ±0.0 30.8 ±0.1 43.3 ±0.3 15.0 ±0.0 v2t 17.0 ±0.5 43.5 ±0.4 57.8 ±0.5 7.2 ±0.2 183.45𝑀
QB-Norm[73] ✗ t2v 17.3 ±0.0 42.1 ±0.1 54.9 ±0.1 𝟖.𝟎 ±0.0 v2t − − − − 262.73𝑀
TT-CE ✗ t2v 11.8 ±0.1 32.7 ±0.1 45.3 ±0.1 13.0 ±0.0 v2t 19.3 ±0.4 47.0 ±0.7 60.0 ±0.4 6.7 ±0.5 183.45𝑀
TT-CE-L ✗ t2v 13.0 ±0.0 34.6 ±0.1 47.3 ±0.2 12.0 ±0.0 v2t 22.4 ±0.3 50.4 ±0.6 63.8 ±0.3 5.3 ±0.5 66.72𝑀
TT-CE+ ✗ t2v 15.0 ±0.1 38.5 ±0.1 51.7 ±0.1 10.0 ±0.0 v2t 25.3 ±0.1 55.6 ±0.0 68.6 ±0.4 𝟒.𝟎 ±0.0 262.73𝑀
TT-CE-J ✗ t2v 16.1 ±0.1 40.1 ±0.1 52.9 ±0.1 9.0 ±0.0 v2t 𝟐𝟔.𝟕 ±0.1 𝟓𝟕.𝟒 ±0.1 𝟕𝟎.𝟓 ±0.4 𝟒.𝟎 ±0.0 330.28𝑀
TT-CE-J(+QB-Norm[73]) ✗ t2v 𝟏𝟖.𝟓 ±0.1 𝟒𝟑.𝟒 ±0.1 𝟓𝟓.𝟗 ±0.0 𝟖.𝟎 ±0.0 v2t − − − − 330.28𝑀
5.10. Condensed movies challenge
TeachTextformed the backbone of our submission to the 2021 Condensed Movies Challenge,8 where we won first place. Our
final submission comprised an ensemble of several models, making use of multiple text embeddings in conjunction withTeachText.
In Table5, in order to enable future comparisons, we present the results of our single models on the validation split of the Condensed
Movies Dataset[3]used for the challenge.
5.11. Comparison to prior work
In Table6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13we compare our approach to prior work on seven datasets. In order to enable fair comparisons,
we split the methods into two categories: those that use large-scale pretraining on text-video data and those that do not use. We use
VT PTcolumn in all tables to distinguish between the two. Since in our case the focus is the usage of multiple text embeddings, we
report results only on the case where the methods do not use video-text pre-training. This makes it easier to study the effect of each
text embedding since there is no pre-learnt connection between the text embedding and the video embedding. Moreover, in order to
8 https://www .robots .ox .ac .uk /~vgg /research /condensed -movies /challenge .html.
15

I.Croitoru,S.-V.Bogolin,M.Leordeanuetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104235
Table7
MSR-VTT1k-Asplit[18]:Comparisonwithothers.VTPT markscaseswherelargescalevisual-textpretrainingwasused.Weshowinboldthebest
performingmodelwherenovisual-textpretrainingisused.
Model VTPT Task 𝑅@1↑ 𝑅@5↑ 𝑅@10↑ 𝑀𝑑𝑅↓ Task 𝑅@1↑ 𝑅@5↑ 𝑅@10↑ 𝑀𝑑𝑅↓ Params
MMT[7] ✓ t2v 26.6 57.1 69.6 4.0 v2t 27.0 57.5 69.7 3.7 133.36𝑀
MMCM[76] ✓ t2v 28.7 ±0.7 59.5 ±0.7 70.3 ±0.7 3.8 ±0.2 v2t − − − − −
SSB[4] ✓ t2v 30.1 58.5 69.3 3.0 v2t 28.5 58.6 71.6 3.0 −
Frozen[77] ✓ t2v 31.0 59.5 70.5 3.0 v2t − − − − 180𝑀
HD-VILA[78] ✓ t2v 35.6 65.3 78.0 3.0 v2t − − − − −
BVTR[79] ✓ t2v 37.6 64.8 75.1 3.0 v2t − − − − −
OA-Trans[80] ✓ t2v 40.9 70.4 80.3 2.0 v2t − − − − −
CLIP4Clip[81] ✓ t2v 44.5 71.4 81.6 2.0 v2t 42.7 70.9 80.6 2.0 −
CLIP2Video[74] ✓ t2v 45.6 72.6 81.7 2.0 v2t 43.5 72.3 82.1 2.0 −
QB-Norm[73] ✓ t2v 47.2 73.0 83.0 2.0 v2t − − − − −
MoEE[5] ✗ t2v 21.6 ±1.0 50.8 ±1.1 65.6 ±0.7 5.3 ±0.6 v2t 22.4 ±0.5 51.2 ±1.0 66.1 ±0.4 5.2 ±0.3 400.41𝑀
CE[6] ✗ t2v 21.7 ±1.3 51.8 ±0.5 65.7 ±0.6 5.0 ±0.0 v2t 22.7 ±0.4 51.8 ±0.4 65.7 ±0.2 5.0 ±0.0 183.45𝑀
MMCM[76] ✗ t2v 22.5 ±0.9 53.2 ±1.5 67.1 ±0.4 4.7 ±0.5 v2t − − − − −
MMT[7] ✗ t2v 24.6 ±0.4 54.0 ±0.2 67.1 ±0.5 4.0 ±0.0 v2t 24.4 ±0.5 56.0 ±0.9 67.8 ±0.3 4.0 ±0.0 133.36𝑀
SSB[24] ✗ t2v 27.4 56.3 67.7 𝟑.𝟎 v2t 26.6 55.1 67.5 𝟑.𝟎 −
QB-Norm[73] ✗ t2v 𝟑𝟑.𝟑 ±0.7 𝟔𝟑.𝟕 ±0.1 76.3 ±0.4 𝟑.𝟎 ±0.0 v2t − − − − 262.73𝑀
TT-MMT ✗ t2v 24.8 ±0.2 55.9 ±0.7 68.5 ±1.0 4.3 ±0.5 v2t 25.1 ±1.0 57.1 ±0.8 69.9 ±1.1 4.0 ±0.0 133.36𝑀
TT-CE-L ✗ t2v 26.5 ±0.4 58.0 ±0.8 71.1 ±0.4 4.0 ±0.0 v2t 27.6 ±0.8 58.0 ±0.6 70.0 ±0.5 4.0 ±0.0 66.72𝑀
TT-CE+ ✗ t2v 29.6 ±0.3 61.6 ±0.5 74.2 ±0.3 𝟑.𝟎 ±0.0 v2t 𝟑𝟐.𝟏 ±0.5 62.7 ±0.5 75.0 ±0.2 𝟑.𝟎 ±0.0 262.73𝑀
TT-CE-J ✗ t2v 29.8 ±0.1 63.6 ±0.5 𝟕𝟔.𝟕 ±0.7 𝟑.𝟎 ±0.0 v2t 30.6 ±0.8 𝟔𝟓.𝟐 ±0.8 𝟕𝟕.𝟏 ±0.5 𝟑.𝟎 ±0.0 330.28𝑀
Table8
MSVD:Comparisontostateoftheartmethods.VTPTmarkscaseswherelargescalevisual-textpretrainingwasused.Weshowinboldthebestperformingmodel
wherenovisual-textpretrainingisused.
Model VTPT Task 𝑅@1↑ 𝑅@5↑ 𝑅@10↑ 𝑀𝑑𝑅↓ Task 𝑅@1↑ 𝑅@5↑ 𝑅@10↑ 𝑀𝑑𝑅↓ Params
SSB[24] ✓ t2v 28.4 60.0 72.9 4.0 v2t 34.7 59.9 70.0 3.0 −
Frozen[77] ✓ t2v 33.7 64.7 76.3 3.0 v2t − − − − −
OA-Trans[80] ✓ t2v 39.1 68.4 80.3 2.0 v2t − − − − −
CLIP4Clip[81] ✓ t2v 46.2 76.1 84.6 2.0 v2t 56.6 79.7 84.3 1.0 −
CLIP4Video[74] ✓ t2v 47.0 76.8 85.9 2.0 v2t 58.7 85.6 91.6 1.0 −
QB-Norm[73] ✓ t2v 47.6 77.6 86.1 2.0 v2t − − − − −
BVTR[79] ✓ t2v 52.0 82.8 90.0 1.0 v2t − − − − −
VSE++[82] ✗ t2v 15.4 39.6 53.0 9.0 v2t 21.2 43.4 52.2 9.0 −
M-Cues[17] ✗ t2v 20.3 47.8 61.1 6.0 v2t 𝟑𝟏.𝟓 51.0 61.5 5.0 −
MoEE[5] ✗ t2v 21.1 ±0.2 52.0 ±0.7 66.7 ±0.2 5.0 ±0.0 v2t 27.3 ±0.9 55.1 ±1.2 65.0 ±0.8 4.3 ±0.5 131.37𝑀
CE[6] ✗ t2v 21.5 ±0.5 52.3 ±0.8 67.5 ±0.7 5.0 ±0.0 v2t 26.3 ±1.4 53.7 ±0.4 65.3 ±1.1 4.8 ±0.2 84.04𝑀
SSB[24] ✗ t2v 23.0 52.8 65.8 5.0 v2t 27.3 50.7 60.8 5.0 −
QB-Norm[73] ✗ t2v 28.9 ±0.3 62.0 ±0.4 74.8 ±0.3 𝟑.𝟎 ±0.0 v2t − − − − 87.79𝑀
TT-CE ✗ t2v 22.1 ±0.4 52.2 ±0.5 67.2 ±0.6 5.0 ±0.0 v2t 26.0 ±0.4 53.3 ±0.4 63.9 ±0.1 4.9 ±0.1 84.04𝑀
TT-CE-L ✗ t2v 22.5 ±0.0 53.7 ±0.3 68.7 ±0.5 5.0 ±0.0 v2t 25.6 ±0.2 55.7 ±0.9 65.9 ±0.5 𝟒.𝟎 ±0.0 27.78𝑀
TT-CE+ ✗ t2v 25.4 ±0.3 56.9 ±0.4 71.3 ±0.2 4.0 ±0.0 v2t 27.1 ±0.4 55.3 ±1.0 67.1 ±0.2 𝟒.𝟎 ±0.0 87.79𝑀
TT-CE-J ✗ t2v 25.9 ±0.2 58.1 ±0.1 72.8 ±0.3 4.0 ±0.0 v2t 29.3 ±0.6 𝟓𝟔.𝟕 ±1.4 𝟔𝟖.𝟖 ±1.2 𝟒.𝟎 ±0.0 108.47𝑀
TT-CE-J(+QB-Norm[73]) ✗ t2v 𝟑𝟎.𝟔 ±0.2 𝟔𝟑.𝟔 ±0.2 𝟕𝟔.𝟓 ±0.2 𝟑.𝟎 ±0.0 v2t − − − − 108.47𝑀
be as fair as possible, in each comparison we included the results of ourTeachText(abbreviated TT in the tables) applied also to
the best existing method for that dataset that does not use text-video data for pre-training. In this way, the architecture and the used
features are identical during inference (e.g. TT-CE has the same architecture and uses the same video and text embeddings as CE).
We also report results combining our strongest model with QB-Norm[73]for all datasets. Following[73]we applied the QB-Norm
method on the text-to-video task. We highlight in bold the best performing method.
In Table6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13we conduct an extensive comparison of our method with other methods from the literature
fort2vandv2ttasks. We also present the number of parameters of each method where available. We observe that TeachText
brings a clear improvement, while the total number of parameters remains the same as for the base architecture. We also introduce
new CE-L and CE-J baselines. These are similar to CE [6] and CE+, but CE-L uses w2v as text embedding and CE-J uses gpt-J as
text embedding. CE-L architecture has a reduced number of parameters. We observe that these architectures combine well with
TeachText, showcasing the effectiveness ofTeachTextacross different parameter regimes. Lastly, qualitative results are provided
in Fig.14.
16

I.Croitoru,S.-V.Bogolin,M.Leordeanuetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104235
Table9
DiDeMo:Comparisontostateoftheartmethods.VTPTmarkscaseswherelargescalevisual-textpretrainingwasused.Weshowinboldthebestperformingmodel
wherenovisual-textpretrainingisused.
Model VTPT Task 𝑅@1↑ 𝑅@5↑ 𝑅@10↑ 𝑅@50↑ 𝑀𝑑𝑅↓ Task 𝑅@1↑ 𝑅@5↑ 𝑅@10↑ 𝑅@50↑ 𝑀𝑑𝑅↓ Params
HD-VILA[78] ✓ t2v 28.8 57.4 68.1 − 4.0 v2t − − − − − −
Frozen[77] ✓ t2v 31.0 59.8 72.4 − 3.0 v2t − − − − − −
OA-Trans[80] ✓ t2v 34.8 64.4 75.1 − 3.0 v2t − − − − − −
BVTR[79] ✓ t2v 37.0 62.2 73.9 − 3.0 v2t − − − − − −
QB-Norm[73] ✓ t2v 43.3 71.4 80.8 − 2.0 v2t − − − − − −
CLIP4Clip[81] ✓ t2v 43.4 70.2 80.6 − 2.0 v2t 42.5 70.6 80.2 − 2.0 −
S2VT[83] ✗ t2v 11.9 33.6 − 76.5 13.0 v2t 13.2 33.6 − 76.5 15.0 −
FSE[84] ✗ t2v 13.9 ±0.7 36.0 ±0.8 − 78.9 ±1.6 11.0 ±0.0 v2t 13.1 ±0.5 33.9 ±0.4 − 78.0 ±0.8 12.0 ±0.0 −
MoEE[5] ✗ t2v 16.1 ±1.0 41.2 ±1.6 55.2 ±1.6 81.7 ±1.4 8.3 ±0.5 v2t 16.0 ±1.5 41.7 ±1.9 54.6 ±1.7 81.0 ±1.4 8.7 ±0.9 107.26𝑀
CE[6] ✗ t2v 17.1 ±0.9 41.9 ±0.2 56.0 ±0.5 83.4 ±0.7 8.0 ±0.0 v2t 17.1 ±0.1 41.8 ±0.9 55.2 ±1.0 83.0 ±0.8 7.7 ±0.5 79.29𝑀
QB-Norm[73] ✗ t2v 24.2 ±0.7 50.8 ±0.7 64.4 ±0.1 − 5.3 ±0.5 v2t − − − − − 99.51𝑀
TT-CE ✗ t2v 21.0 ±0.6 47.5 ±0.9 61.9 ±0.5 86.4 ±0.8 6.0 ±0.0 v2t 20.3 ±0.6 46.6 ±0.6 59.8 ±1.2 85.7 ±0.6 6.7 ±0.5 79.29𝑀
TT-CE-L ✗ t2v 22.3 ±0.2 50.1 ±0.9 64.3 ±0.5 86.9 ±0.4 5.3 ±0.5 v2t 21.3 ±0.4 𝟒𝟖.𝟑 ±0.5 62.5 ±0.3 86.6 ±0.1 𝟔.𝟎 ±0.0 43.51𝑀
TT-CE+ ✗ t2v 21.6 ±0.7 48.6 ±0.4 62.9 ±0.6 86.8 ±0.3 6.0 ±0.0 v2t 21.1 ±0.2 47.3 ±0.2 61.1 ±0.4 86.7 ±0.2 6.3 ±0.5 99.51𝑀
TT-CE-J ✗ t2v 23.4 ±0.3 50.4 ±0.5 63.8 ±0.7 88.2 ±0.2 5.3 ±0.5 v2t 𝟐𝟐.𝟎 ±0.7 48.0 ±0.6 𝟔𝟐.𝟕 ±0.8 𝟖𝟕.𝟑 ±0.4 𝟔.𝟎 ±0.0 118.81𝑀
TT-CE-J(+QB-Norm[73]) ✗ t2v 𝟐𝟔.𝟐 ±0.3 𝟓𝟐.𝟔 ±0.8 𝟔𝟔.𝟐 ±1.1 𝟖𝟗.𝟒 ±0.4 𝟓.𝟎 ±0.0 v2t − − − − − 118.81𝑀
Table10
LSMDC:Comparisontostateoftheartmethods.VTPTmarkscaseswherelargescalevisual-textpretrainingwasused.Weshowinboldthebestperformingmodel
wherenovisual-textpretrainingisused.
Model VTPT Task 𝑅@1↑ 𝑅@5↑ 𝑅@10↑ 𝑀𝑑𝑅↓ Task 𝑅@1↑ 𝑅@5↑ 𝑅@10↑ 𝑀𝑑𝑅↓ Params
MMT[7] ✓ t2v 12.9 ±0.1 29.9 ±0.7 40.1 ±0.8 19.3 ±0.2 v2t 12.3 ±0.2 28.6 ±0.3 38.9 ±0.8 20.0 ±0.0 133.16𝑀
Frozen[77] ✓ t2v 15.0 30.8 40.3 20.0 v2t − − − − −
HD-VILA[78] ✓ t2v 17.4 34.1 44.1 15.0 v2t − − − − −
BVTR[79] ✓ t2v 17.9 35.4 44.5 15.0 v2t − − − − −
OA-Trans[80] ✓ t2v 18.2 34.3 43.7 18.5 v2t − − − − −
CLIP4Clip[81] ✓ t2v 21.6 41.8 49.8 11.0 v2t 20.8 39.0 48.6 12.0 −
QB-Norm[73] ✓ t2v 22.4 40.1 49.5 11.0 v2t − − − − −
JSFus[18] ✗ t2v 9.1 21.2 34.1 36.0 v2t − − − − −
MoEE[5] ✗ t2v 12.1 ±0.7 29.4 ±0.8 37.7 ±0.2 23.2 ±0.8 v2t 11.9 ±0.5 28.0 ±0.5 37.4 ±0.5 25.5 ±1.5 159.78𝑀
CE[6] ✗ t2v 12.4 ±0.7 28.5 ±0.8 37.9 ±0.6 21.7 ±0.6 v2t 11.4 ±0.4 28.4 ±0.7 36.5 ±0.5 25.0 ±0.8 116.86𝑀
MMT[7] ✗ t2v 13.2 ±0.4 29.2 ±0.8 38.8 ±0.9 21.0 ±1.4 v2t 12.1 ±0.1 29.3 ±1.1 37.9 ±1.1 22.5 ±0.4 133.16𝑀
QB-Norm[73] ✗ t2v 17.8 ±0.4 37.7 ±0.5 47.6 ±0.6 12.7 ±0.5 v2t − − − − 388.24𝑀
TT-MMT ✗ t2v 13.6 ±0.5 31.2 ±0.4 40.8 ±0.5 17.7 ±0.5 v2t 12.5 ±0.3 31.3 ±0.6 41.0 ±1.1 18.7 ±0.5 133.16𝑀
TT-CE-L ✗ t2v 14.2 ±0.2 30.6 ±0.3 40.0 ±0.5 20.3 ±0.5 v2t 13.6 ±0.3 30.8 ±0.9 38.9 ±0.8 21.5 ±0.4 87.22𝑀
TT-CE+ ✗ t2v 17.2 ±0.4 36.5 ±0.6 46.3 ±0.3 13.7 ±0.5 v2t 17.5 ±0.6 36.0 ±1.2 45.0 ±0.5 14.3 ±0.9 388.24𝑀
TT-CE-J ✗ t2v 19.6 ±0.8 39.6 ±0.5 50.1 ±0.7 10.7 ±0.5 v2t 𝟏𝟗.𝟑 ±0.4 𝟑𝟖.𝟗 ±0.2 𝟒𝟖.𝟒 ±0.6 𝟏𝟏.𝟑 ±0.5 491.98𝑀
TT-CE-J(+QB-Norm[73]) ✗ t2v 𝟐𝟎.𝟓 ±0.5 𝟒𝟎.𝟕 ±0.3 𝟓𝟏.𝟑 ±0.5 𝟗.𝟕 ±0.5 v2t − − − − 491.98𝑀
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we have introduced TeachText, a novel algorithm designed for text-video retrieval tasks. Utilizing a teacher-
student paradigm, this algorithm effectively leverages multiple text embeddings, allowing for improved performance across diverse
benchmarks. The key contributions of this work include the introduction ofTeachText, which makes use of multiple text encoders to
enhance retrieval tasks. Additionally, we present a unique approach to learning the retrieval similarity matrix, distinguishing our work
from existing techniques. We also demonstrate the utility of our method for dataset denoising, contributing to improved data quality
for text-video retrieval. Experimental results validate the effectiveness of our method, showing notable improvements on six different
benchmarks. This research builds upon our previous publication in ICCV 2021. We have further optimized the CE+ architecture,
adding two new variants that either minimize parameters or utilize GPT-J embeddings for better performance. Additional results
are provided for the Condensed Movies Dataset, along with an in-depth analysis that includes ablation studies and error analysis.
Our work also expands upon denoising techniques, offering a thorough evaluation of theTeachVideoapproach. Overall, this paper
presents significant advancements in the field of text-video retrieval, both in terms of methodological contributions and practical
applications.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
17

I.Croitoru,S.-V.Bogolin,M.Leordeanuetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104235
Table11
ActivityNet:Comparisontostateoftheartmethods.VTPTmarkscaseswherelargescalevisual-textpretrainingwasused.Weshowinboldthebestperforming
modelwherenovisual-textpretrainingisused.
Model VTPT Task 𝑅@1↑ 𝑅@5↑ 𝑅@50↑ 𝑀𝑑𝑅↓ Task 𝑅@1↑ 𝑅@5↑ 𝑅@50↑ 𝑀𝑑𝑅↓ Params
MMT[7] ✓ t2v 28.7 ±0.2 61.4 ±0.2 94.5 ±0.0 3.3 ±0.5 v2t 28.9 ±0.2 61.1 ±0.2 94.3 ±0.4 4.0 ±0.0 127.35𝑀
HD-VILA[78] ✓ t2v 28.5 57.4 94.0 4.0 v2t − − − − −
MMCM[76] ✓ t2v 29.0 ±0.5 61.7 ±0.3 94.6 ±0.2 4.0 ±0.0 v2t − − − − −
SSB[24] ✓ t2v 29.2 61.6 94.7 3.0 v2t 28.7 60.8 94.8 2.0 −
Frozen[77] ✓ t2v 28.8 60.9 − 3.0 v2t − − − − −
CLIP4Clip[81] ✓ t2v 40.5 72.4 98.2 2.0 v2t 41.4 73.7 85.3 2.0 −
QB-Norm[73] ✓ t2v 41.4 71.4 97.6 2.0 v2t − − − − −
MoEE[5] ✗ t2v 19.7 ±0.3 50.0 ±0.5 92.0 ±0.2 5.3 ±0.5 v2t 18.3 ±0.5 48.3 ±0.8 92.0 ±0.2 6.0 ±0.0 330.42𝑀
CE[6] ✗ t2v 19.9 ±0.3 50.1 ±0.7 92.2 ±0.6 5.3 ±0.5 v2t 18.6 ±0.3 48.6 ±0.7 92.0 ±0.2 6.0 ±0.0 260.68𝑀
HSE[57] ✗ t2v 20.5 49.3 − − v2t 18.7 48.1 − − −
MMT[7] ✗ t2v 22.7 ±0.2 54.2 ±1.0 93.2 ±0.4 5.0 ±0.0 v2t 22.9 ±0.8 54.8 ±0.4 93.1 ±0.2 4.3 ±0.5 127.35𝑀
SSB[24] ✗ t2v 26.8 58.1 93.5 𝟑.𝟎 v2t 𝟐𝟓.𝟓 57.3 93.5 𝟑.𝟎 −
QB-Norm[73] ✗ t2v 27.0 ±0.2 60.6 ±0.4 96.8 ±0.0 4.0 ±0.0 v2t − − − − 376.02𝑀
TT-MMT ✗ t2v 25.0 ±0.3 58.7 ±0.4 95.6 ±0.2 4.0 ±0.0 v2t 24.4 ±0.1 𝟓𝟖.𝟐 ±0.3 95.7 ±0.1 4.0 ±0.0 127.35𝑀
TT-CE-L ✗ t2v 23.3 ±0.1 56.3 ±0.1 95.5 ±0.1 4.0 ±0.0 v2t 20.7 ±0.2 52.8 ±0.2 94.4 ±0.0 5.0 ±0.0 103𝑀
TT-CE+ ✗ t2v 23.5 ±0.2 57.2 ±0.5 96.1 ±0.1 4.0 ±0.0 v2t 23.0 ±0.3 56.1 ±0.2 95.8 ±0.0 4.0 ±0.0 376.02𝑀
TT-CE-J ✗ t2v 24.7 ±0.1 58.3 ±0.2 96.1 ±0.1 4.0 ±0.0 v2t 23.6 ±0.0 56.8 ±0.4 𝟗𝟔.𝟏 ±0.0 4.0 ±0.0 470.11𝑀
TT-CE-J(+QB-Norm[73]) ✗ t2v 𝟐𝟖.𝟑 ±0.3 𝟔𝟏.𝟔 ±0.1 𝟗𝟔.𝟖 ±0.1 𝟑.𝟎 ±0.0 t2v − − − − 470.11𝑀
Table12
VaTeX:Comparisontostateoftheartmethods.VTPTmarkscaseswherelargescalevisual-textpretrainingwasused.Weshowinboldthebestperformingmodel
wherenovisual-textpretrainingisused.
Model VTPT Task 𝑅@1↑ 𝑅@5↑ 𝑅@10↑ 𝑀𝑑𝑅↓ Task 𝑅@1↑ 𝑅@5↑ 𝑅@10↑ 𝑀𝑑𝑅↓ Params
SSB[24] ✓ t2v 45.9 82.4 90.4 1.0 v2t 61.2 85.2 91.8 1.0 −
CLIP2Video[74] ✓ t2v 57.3 90.0 95.5 1.0 v2t 76.0 97.7 99.9 1.0 −
QB-Norm[73] ✓ t2v 58.8 88.3 93.8 1.0 v2t - - - - -
VSE[85] ✗ t2v 28.0 64.3 76.9 3.0 v2t − − − − −
Dual[75] ✗ t2v 31.1 67.4 78.9 3.0 v2t − − − − −
VSE++[82] ✗ t2v 33.7 70.1 81.0 2.0 v2t − − − − −
HGR[20] ✗ t2v 35.1 73.5 83.5 2.0 v2t − − − − −
SSB[24] ✗ t2v 44.6 81.8 89.5 𝟏.𝟎 v2t 58.1 83.8 90.9 𝟏.𝟎 −
CE[6] ✗ t2v 47.9 ±0.1 84.2 ±0.1 91.3 ±0.1 2.0 ±0.0 v2t 60.7 ±1.0 89.0 ±0.4 94.9 ±0.2 𝟏.𝟎 ±0.0 115.56𝑀
QB-Norm[73] ✗ t2v 54.8 ±0.1 88.2 ±0.1 93.8 ±0.1 𝟏.𝟎 ±0.0 v2t − − − − 223.1𝑀
TT-CE ✗ t2v 49.7 ±0.1 85.6 ±0.1 92.4 ±0.1 2.0 ±0.0 v2t 62.1 ±0.2 90.0 ±0.1 95.3 ±0.1 𝟏.𝟎 ±0.0 115.56𝑀
TT-CE-L ✗ t2v 51.5 ±0.1 86.5 ±0.1 92.6 ±0.1 𝟏.𝟎 ±0.0 v2t 65.0 ±0.5 90.3 ±0.5 95.9 ±0.2 𝟏.𝟎 ±0.0 55.07𝑀
TT-CE+ ✗ t2v 53.2 ±0.2 87.4 ±0.1 93.3 ±0.0 𝟏.𝟎 ±0.0 v2t 64.7 ±0.3 91.5 ±0.3 96.2 ±0.1 𝟏.𝟎 ±0.0 223.1𝑀
TT-CE-J ✗ t2v 55.4 ±0.2 89.0 ±0.1 94.3 ±0.0 𝟏.𝟎 ±0.0 v2t 𝟔𝟖.𝟕 ±0.6 𝟗𝟐.𝟐 ±0.1 𝟗𝟔.𝟕 ±0.1 𝟏.𝟎 ±0.0 281𝑀
TT-CE-J(+QB-Norm[73]) ✗ t2v 𝟓𝟔.𝟗 ±0.0 𝟖𝟗.𝟓 ±0.1 𝟗𝟒.𝟖 ±0.0 𝟏.𝟎 ±0.0 v2t − − − − 281𝑀
Table13
QuerYD:Comparisontostateoftheartmethods.VTPTmarkscaseswherelargescalevisual-textpretrainingwasused.Weshowinboldthebestperformingmodel
wherenovisual-textpretrainingisused.
Model VTPT Task 𝑅@1↑ 𝑅@5↑ 𝑅@10↑ 𝑀𝑑𝑅↓ Task 𝑅@1↑ 𝑅@5↑ 𝑅@10↑ 𝑀𝑑𝑅↓ Params
MoEE[5] ✗ t2v 11.6 ±1.3 30.2 ±3.0 43.2 ±3.1 14.2 ±1.6 v2t 13.0 ±3.1 30.9 ±2.0 43.0 ±2.8 14.5 ±1.8 57.75𝑀
CE[6] ✗ t2v 13.9 ±0.8 37.6 ±1.2 48.3 ±1.4 11.3 ±0.6 v2t 13.7 ±0.7 35.2 ±2.7 46.9 ±3.2 12.3 ±1.5 30.82𝑀
QB-Norm[73] ✗ t2v 15.1 ±1.6 38.3 ±2.4 51.2 ±2.8 10.3 ±1.7 v2t − − − − 30.82𝑀
TT-CE ✗ t2v 14.2 ±1.4 36.6 ±2.0 51.1 ±2.1 9.7 ±1.2 v2t 14.1 ±0.5 34.8 ±3.0 𝟒𝟗.𝟏 ±0.3 𝟏𝟏.𝟑 ±0.5 30.82𝑀
TT-CE+ ✗ t2v 14.4 ±0.5 37.7 ±1.7 50.9 ±1.6 9.8 ±1.0 v2t 𝟏𝟒.𝟑 ±0.6 𝟑𝟔.𝟑 ±0.9 48.3 ±1.2 𝟏𝟏.𝟑 ±0.5 30.82𝑀
TT-CE-J ✗ t2v 13.9 ±1.3 38.8 ±2.8 51.6 ±1.8 10.0 ±0.8 v2t 13.9 ±0.5 36.0 ±0.9 48.6 ±1.7 𝟏𝟏.𝟑 ±1.2 30.82𝑀
TT-CE-J(+QB-Norm[73]) ✗ t2v 𝟏𝟓.𝟒 ±0.9 𝟒𝟎.𝟓 ±1.0 𝟓𝟐.𝟑 ±1.7 𝟗.𝟐 ±1.0 v2t − − − − 30.82𝑀
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by EPSRC grant EP/T028572/1 and a gift from Adobe. M.L. was supported by UEFISCDI, under project
EEA-RO-2018-0496. The authors would like to thank Gyungin Shin, Iulia Duta and Jenny Hu for assistance. S.A would like to ac-
knowledge the support of Z. Novak, N. Novak and S. Carlson in enabling his contribution.
During the preparation of this work the authors used GPT-4 in order to slightly rephrase parts of the content. After using this
tool/service, the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the content of the publication.
18

I.Croitoru,S.-V.Bogolin,M.Leordeanuetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104235
Data availability
Code and data are available online as state in the paper, at https://www .robots .ox .ac .uk /vgg /research /teachtext/.
References
[1]I.Croitoru,S.-V.Bogolin,M.Leordeanu,H.Jin,A.Zisserman,S.Albanie,Y.Liu,Teachtext:crossmodalgeneralizeddistillationfortext-videoretrieval,in:
ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFInternationalConferenceonComputerVision,2021.
[2]B.Wang,A.Komatsuzaki,GPT-J-6B:a6billionparameterautoregressivelanguagemodel,in,https://github.com/kingoflolz/mesh-transformer-jax,2021.
[3]M.Bain,A.Nagrani,A.Brown,A.Zisserman,Condensedmovies:storybasedretrievalwithcontextualembeddings,in:ProceedingsoftheAsianConferenceon
ComputerVision,2020.
[4]W.Park,D.Kim,Y.Lu,M.Cho,Relationalknowledgedistillation,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConferenceonComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,
2019.
[5]A.Miech,I.Laptev,J.Sivic,Learningatext-videoembeddingfromincompleteandheterogeneousdata,in:arXivpreprint,arXiv:1804.02516,2018.
[6]Y.Liu,S.Albanie,A.Nagrani,A.Zisserman,Usewhatyouhave:videoretrievalusingrepresentationsfromcollaborativeexperts,in:arXivpreprint,arXiv:
1907.13487,2019.
[7]V.Gabeur,C.Sun,K.Alahari,C.Schmid,Multi-modaltransformerforvideoretrieval,in:ProceedingsoftheEuropeanConferenceonComputerVision,2020.
[8]R.Xu,C.Xiong,W.Chen,J.J.Corso,Jointlymodelingdeepvideoandcompositionaltexttobridgevisionandlanguageinaunifiedframework,in:Proceedings
oftheAAAIConferenceonArtificialIntelligence,2015.
[9]J.Sivic,A.Zisserman,VideoGoogle:atextretrievalapproachtoobjectmatchinginvideos,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConferenceonComputerVision
andPatternRecognition,IEEE,2003.
[10] I.Laptev,P.Pérez,Retrievingactionsinmovies,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFInternationalConferenceonComputerVision,2007.
[11] Y.-G.Jiang,C.-W.Ngo,J.Yang,Towardsoptimalbag-of-featuresforobjectcategorizationandsemanticvideoretrieval,in:ProceedingsoftheACMInternational
ConferenceonImageandVideoRetrieval,2007.
[12] L.Jiang,D.Meng,T.Mitamura,A.G.Hauptmann,Easysamplesfirst:self-pacedrerankingforzero-examplemultimediasearch,in:Proceedingsofthe22ndACM
InternationalConferenceonMultimedia,2014.
[13] C.Gan,Y.Yang,L.Zhu,D.Zhao,Y.Zhuang,RecognizinganActionUsingItsName:AKnowledge-BasedApproach,vol.120,Springer,2016,pp.61–77.
[14] C.Gan,C.Sun,R.Nevatia,Deck:discoveringeventcompositionknowledgefromwebimagesforzero-shoteventdetectionandrecountinginvideos,in:Pro-
ceedingsoftheAAAIConferenceonArtificialIntelligence,2017.
[15] Y.Aytar,M.Shah,J.Luo,Utilizingsemanticwordsimilaritymeasuresforvideoretrieval,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConferenceonComputerVisionand
PatternRecognition,2008.
[16] J.Dong,X.Li,C.G.Snoek,Word2visualvec:imageandvideotosentencematchingbyvisualfeatureprediction,in:arXivpreprint,arXiv:1604.06838,2016.
[17] N.C.Mithun,J.Li,F.Metze,A.K.Roy-Chowdhury,Learningjointembeddingwithmultimodalcuesforcross-modalvideo-textretrieval,in:Proceedingsofthe
ACMInternationalConferenceonMultimediaRetrieval,2018.
[18] Y.Yu,J.Kim,G.Kim,Ajointsequencefusionmodelforvideoquestionansweringandretrieval,in:ProceedingsoftheEuropeanConferenceonComputerVision,
2018.
[19] M.Wray,D.Larlus,G.Csurka,D.Damen,Fine-grainedactionretrievalthroughmultipleparts-of-speechembeddings,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConference
onComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,2019.
[20] S.Chen,Y.Zhao,Q.Jin,Q.Wu,Fine-grainedvideo-textretrievalwithhierarchicalgraphreasoning,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConferenceonComputer
VisionandPatternRecognition,2020.
[21] A.Miech,D.Zhukov,J.-B.Alayrac,M.Tapaswi,I.Laptev,J.Sivic,Howto100m:learningatext-videoembeddingbywatchinghundredmillionnarratedvideo
clips,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConferenceonComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,2019.
[22] A.Miech,J.-B.Alayrac,L.Smaira,I.Laptev,J.Sivic,A.Zisserman,End-to-endlearningofvisualrepresentationsfromuncuratedinstructionalvideos,in:arXiv
preprint,arXiv:1912.06430,2019.
[23] B.Korbar,F.Petroni,R.Girdhar,L.Torresani,Videounderstandingasmachinetranslation,in:arXivpreprint,arXiv:2006.07203,2020.
[24] M.Patrick,P.-Y.Huang,Y.Asano,F.Metze,A.Hauptmann,J.Henriques,A.Vedaldi,Support-setbottlenecksforvideo-textrepresentationlearning,in:arXiv
preprint,arXiv:2010.02824,2020.
[25] C.G.Snoek,M.Worring,MultimodalVideoIndexing:AReviewoftheState-of-the-Art,vol.25,Springer,2005,pp.5–35.
[26] T.Mikolov,K.Chen,G.Corrado,J.Dean,Efficientestimationofwordrepresentationsinvectorspace,in:arXivpreprint,arXiv:1301.3781,2013.
[27] A.Radford,K.Narasimhan,T.Salimans,I.Sutskever,etal.,Improvinglanguageunderstandingbygenerativepre-training,OpenAI,2018.
[28] A.Radford,J.Wu,R.Child,D.Luan,D.Amodei,I.Sutskever,Languagemodelsareunsupervisedmultitasklearners,in:Preprint,2019.
[29] J.Devlin,M.-W.Chang,K.Lee,K.Toutanova,Bert:pre-trainingofdeepbidirectionaltransformersforlanguageunderstanding,in:ProceedingsoftheAssociation
forComputationalLinguistics,2019.
[30] A.Burns,R.Tan,K.Saenko,S.Sclaroff,B.A.Plummer,Languagefeaturesmatter:effectivelanguagerepresentationsforvision-languagetasks,in:Proceedings
oftheIEEE/CVFConferenceonComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,2019.
[31] Y.Liu,M.Ott,N.Goyal,J.Du,M.Joshi,D.Chen,O.Levy,M.Lewis,L.Zettlemoyer,V.Stoyanov,Roberta:arobustlyoptimizedbertpretrainingapproach,in:
arXivpreprint,arXiv:1907.11692,2019.
[32] Z.Lan,M.Chen,S.Goodman,K.Gimpel,P.Sharma,R.Soricut,Albert:alitebertforself-supervisedlearningoflanguagerepresentations,in:arXivpreprint,
arXiv:1909.11942,2019.
[33] L.Breiman,N.Shang,BornAgainTrees,vol.1,Citeseer,1996,p.2.
[34] C.Buciluaˇ,R.Caruana,A.Niculescu-Mizil,Modelcompression,in:ProceedingsoftheACMSIGKDDInternationalConferenceonKnowledgeDiscoveryandData
Mining,2006.
[35] G.Hinton,O.Vinyals,J.Dean,Distillingtheknowledgeinaneuralnetwork,in:arXivpreprint,arXiv:1503.02531,2015.
[36] D.Lopez-Paz,L.Bottou,B.Schölkopf,V.Vapnik,Unifyingdistillationandprivilegedinformation,in:ProceedingsoftheInternationalConferenceonLearning
Representations,2016.
[37] V.Vapnik,A.Vashist,ANewLearningParadigm:LearningUsingPrivilegedInformation,vol.22,Elsevier,2009,pp.544–557.
[38] V.Vapnik,R.Izmailov,Learningusingprivilegedinformation:similaritycontrolandknowledgetransfer16(2015)2023–2049.
[39] A.Romero,N.Ballas,S.E.Kahou,A.Chassang,C.Gatta,Y.Bengio,Fitnets:hintsforthindeepnets,in:arXivpreprint,arXiv:1412.6550,2014.
[40] S.Zagoruyko,N.Komodakis,Payingmoreattentiontoattention:improvingtheperformanceofconvolutionalneuralnetworksviaattentiontransfer,in:arXiv
preprint,arXiv:1612.03928,2016.
[41] Z.Huang,N.Wang,Likewhatyoulike:knowledgedistillvianeuronselectivitytransfer,in:arXivpreprint,arXiv:1707.01219,2017.
[42] Y.-L.Li,X.Liu,X.Wu,Y.Li,C.Lu,Hoianalysis:integratinganddecomposinghuman-objectinteraction,in:H.Larochelle,M.Ranzato,R.Hadsell,M.F.Balcan,
H.Lin(Eds.),AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems,vol.33,CurranAssociates,Inc.,2020,pp.5011–5022.
19

I.Croitoru,S.-V.Bogolin,M.Leordeanuetal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104235
[43] Y.Cao,M.Long,J.Wang,S.Liu,Deepvisual-semanticquantizationforefficientimageretrieval,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConferenceonComputerVision
andPatternRecognition,2017.
[44] Q.Wang,A.B.Chan,Describinglikehumans:ondiversityinimagecaptioning,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConferenceonComputerVisionandPattern
Recognition,2019.
[45] P.Bojanowski,R.Lajugie,E.Grave,F.Bach,I.Laptev,J.Ponce,C.Schmid,Weakly-supervisedalignmentofvideowithtext,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVF
ConferenceonComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,2015.
[46] R.Socher,A.Karpathy,Q.V.Le,C.D.Manning,A.Y.Ng,GroundedCompositionalSemanticsforFindingandDescribingImageswithSentences,vol.2,MITPress,
2014,pp.207–218.
[47] J.Carreira,A.Zisserman,Quovadis,actionrecognition?Anewmodelandthekineticsdataset,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConferenceonComputerVision
andPatternRecognition,2017.
[48] D.Tran,H.Wang,L.Torresani,J.Ray,Y.LeCun,M.Paluri,Acloserlookatspatiotemporalconvolutionsforactionrecognition,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVF
ConferenceonComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,2018.
[49] D.Ghadiyaram,D.Tran,D.Mahajan,Large-scaleweakly-supervisedpre-trainingforvideoactionrecognition,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConferenceon
ComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,2019.
[50] A.Paszke,S.Gross,F.Massa,A.Lerer,J.Bradbury,G.Chanan,T.Killeen,Z.Lin,N.Gimelshein,L.Antiga,etal.,Pytorch:animperativestyle,high-performance
deeplearninglibrary,in:AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems,2019.
[51] D.P.Kingma,J.Ba,Adam:amethodforstochasticoptimization,in:arXivpreprint,arXiv:1412.6980,2014.
[52] J.Xu,T.Mei,T.Yao,Y.Rui,Msr-vtt:alargevideodescriptiondatasetforbridgingvideoandlanguage,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConferenceonComputer
VisionandPatternRecognition,2016.
[53] D.L.Chen,W.B.Dolan,Collectinghighlyparalleldataforparaphraseevaluation,in:ProceedingsoftheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics,2011.
[54] S.Venugopalan,M.Rohrbach,J.Donahue,R.Mooney,T.Darrell,K.Saenko,Sequencetosequence-videototext,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConference
onComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,2015.
[55] L.AnneHendricks,O.Wang,E.Shechtman,J.Sivic,T.Darrell,B.Russell,Localizingmomentsinvideowithnaturallanguage,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVF
ConferenceonComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,2017.
[56] B.Thomee,D.A.Shamma,G.Friedland,B.Elizalde,K.Ni,D.Poland,D.Borth,L.-J.Li,Yfcc100m:TheNewDatainMultimediaResearch,vol.59,ACM,New
York,NY,USA,2016,pp.64–73.
[57] B.Zhang,H.Hu,F.Sha,Cross-modalandhierarchicalmodelingofvideoandtext,in:ProceedingsoftheEuropeanConferenceonComputerVision,2018.
[58] A.Rohrbach,A.Torabi,M.Rohrbach,N.Tandon,C.Pal,H.Larochelle,A.Courville,B.Schiele,MovieDescription,vol.123,Springer,2017,pp.94–120.
[59] F.CabaHeilbron,V.Escorcia,B.Ghanem,J.CarlosNiebles,Activitynet:alarge-scalevideobenchmarkforhumanactivityunderstanding,in:Proceedingsofthe
IEEE/CVFConferenceonComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,2015.
[60] X.Wang,J.Wu,J.Chen,L.Li,Y.-F.Wang,W.Y.Wang,Vatex:alarge-scale,high-qualitymultilingualdatasetforvideo-and-languageresearch,in:Proceedings
oftheIEEE/CVFConferenceonComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,2019.
[61] A.-M.Oncescu,J.F.Henriques,Y.Liu,A.Z.Zisserman,S.Albanie,Queryd:avideodatasetwithhigh-qualitytextualandaudionarrations,in:arXivpreprint,
arXiv:2011.11071,2020.
[62] J.Hu,L.Shen,S.Albanie,G.Sun,E.Wu,2019,Squeeze-and-excitationnetworks.
[63] S.Xie,R.Girshick,P.Dollár,Z.Tu,K.He,Aggregatedresidualtransformationsfordeepneuralnetworks,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConferenceon
ComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,2017.
[64] D.Mahajan,R.Girshick,V.Ramanathan,K.He,M.Paluri,Y.Li,A.Bharambe,L.vanderMaaten,Exploringthelimitsofweaklysupervisedpretraining,in:
ProceedingsoftheEuropeanConferenceonComputerVision,2018.
[65] S.Hershey,S.Chaudhuri,D.P.W.Ellis,J.F.Gemmeke,A.Jansen,C.Moore,M.Plakal,D.Platt,R.A.Saurous,B.Seybold,M.Slaney,R.Weiss,K.Wilson,Cnn
architecturesforlarge-scaleaudioclassification,in:InternationalConferenceonAcoustics,SpeechandSignalProcessing(ICASSP),2017.
[66] B.Zhou,A.Lapedriza,A.Khosla,A.Oliva,A.Torralba,Places:A10millionimagedatabaseforscenerecognition,2017.
[67] G.Huang,Z.Liu,L.VanDerMaaten,K.Q.Weinberger,Denselyconnectedconvolutionalnetworks,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConferenceonComputer
VisionandPatternRecognition,2017.
[68] R.Krishna,Y.Zhu,O.Groth,J.Johnson,K.Hata,J.Kravitz,S.Chen,Y.Kalantidis,L.-J.Li,D.A.Shamma,etal.,VisualGenome:ConnectingLanguageand
VisionUsingCrowdsourcedDenseImageAnnotations,vol.123,Springer,2017,pp.32–73.
[69] A.Vaswani,N.Shazeer,N.Parmar,J.Uszkoreit,L.Jones,A.N.Gomez,Ł.Kaiser,I.Polosukhin,Attentionisallyouneed,in:AdvancesinNeuralInformation
ProcessingSystems,2017.
[70] F.team,Ffmpeg,https://www.ffmpeg.org/,2020.
[71] J.Tang,K.Wang,Rankingdistillation:learningcompactrankingmodelswithhighperformanceforrecommendersystem,in:ProceedingsoftheACMSIGKDD
InternationalConferenceonKnowledgeDiscoveryandDataMining,2018.
[72] W.-J.Ko,G.Durrett,J.J.Li,Domainagnosticreal-valuedspecificityprediction,in:ProceedingsoftheAAAIConferenceonArtificialIntelligence,2019.
[73] S.-V.Bogolin,I.Croitoru,H.Jin,Y.Liu,S.Albanie,Crossmodalretrievalwithquerybanknormalisation,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConferenceonComputer
VisionandPatternRecognition,2022.
[74] H.Fang,P.Xiong,L.Xu,Y.Chen,Clip2video:masteringvideo-textretrievalviaimageclip,in:arXivpreprint,arXiv:2106.11097,2021.
[75] J.Dong,X.Li,C.Xu,S.Ji,X.Wang,Dualdenseencodingforzero-examplevideoretrieval,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConferenceonComputerVisionand
PatternRecognition,2019.
[76] V.Gabeur,A.Nagrani,C.Sun,K.Alahari,C.Schmid,Maskingmodalitiesforcross-modalvideoretrieval,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFWinterConferenceon
ApplicationsofComputerVision,2022.
[77] M.Bain,A.Nagrani,G.Varol,A.Zisserman,Frozenintime:ajointvideoandimageencoderforend-to-endretrieval,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFInternational
ConferenceonComputerVision,2021.
[78] H.Xue,T.Hang,Y.Zeng,Y.Sun,B.Liu,H.Yang,J.Fu,B.Guo,Advancinghigh-resolutionvideo-languagerepresentationwithlarge-scalevideotranscriptions,
in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConferenceonComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,2022.
[79] Y.Ge,Y.Ge,X.Liu,D.Li,Y.Shan,X.Qie,P.Luo,Bridgingvideo-textretrievalwithmultiplechoicequestions,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConferenceon
ComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,2022.
[80] J.Wang,Y.Ge,G.Cai,R.Yan,X.Lin,Y.Shan,X.Qie,M.Z.Shou,Object-awarevideo-languagepre-trainingforretrieval,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVF
ConferenceonComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,2022.
[81] H.Luo,L.Ji,M.Zhong,Y.Chen,W.Lei,N.Duan,T.Li,CLIP4Clip:anempiricalstudyofclipforendtoendvideoclipretrieval,in:arXivpreprint,arXiv:
2104.08860,2021.
[82] F.Faghri,D.J.Fleet,J.R.Kiros,S.Fidler,Vse++:improvingvisual-semanticembeddingswithhardnegatives,in:arXivpreprint,arXiv:1707.05612,2017.
[83] S.Venugopalan,H.Xu,J.Donahue,M.Rohrbach,R.Mooney,K.Saenko,Translatingvideostonaturallanguageusingdeeprecurrentneuralnetworks,in:arXiv
preprint,arXiv:1412.4729,2014.
[84] M.Zhang,J.Lucas,J.Ba,G.E.Hinton,Lookaheadoptimizer:kstepsforward,1stepback,in:AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems,2019.
[85] R.Kiros,R.Salakhutdinov,R.S.Zemel,Unifyingvisual-semanticembeddingswithmultimodalneurallanguagemodels,in:arXivpreprint,arXiv:1411.2539,
2014.
20

