ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104241
ContentslistsavailableatScienceDirect
Artificial Intelligence
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/artint
✩
The complexity of optimizing atomic congestion
Cornelius Branda, Robert Ganianb, Subrahmanyam Kalyanasundaramc,
Inerneyb,∗,1
Fionn Mc
aAlgorithms & Complexity Theory Group, Regensburg University, Germany
bAlgorithms and Complexity Group, TU Wien, Austria
cDepartment of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Hyderabad, India
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords: Atomic congestion games are a classic topic in network design, routing, and algorithmic game
Atomic congestion games theory, and are capable of modeling congestion and flow optimization tasks in various application
System optimum areas. While both the price of anarchy for such games as well as the computational complexity
Routing
of computing their Nash equilibria are by now well-understood, the computational complexity of
Para meterize dcomplexity
computing a system-optimalset of strategies—that is, a centrally planned routing that minimizes the
Slimtreecutwidth
average cost of agents—is severely understudied in the literature. We close this gap by identifying
the exact boundaries of tractability for the problem through the lens of the parameterized
complexity paradigm. After showing that the problem remains highly intractable even on
extremely simple networks, we obtain a set of results which demonstrate that the structural
parameters which control the computational (in)tractability of the problem are not vertex-
separator based in nature (such as, e.g., treewidth), but rather based on edge separators. We
conclude by extending our analysis towards the (even more challenging) min-max variant of the
problem.
1. Introduction
Congestion games are a by-now classic and widely studied model of network resource sharing. Introduced by Rosenthal [54],
congestion games and their innumerable variants and extensions have been the focus of a vast body of literature, spanning fields from
algorithmic game theory[13]over routing[44]and network design[3], to diverse contexts within artificial intelligence[4,36,45,47],
both applied and theoretical.
The basic setup of congestion games comprises a network (modeled as a directed graph) and a set of agents that each have an
origin and a destination.2The agents need to decide which routes to take in order to reach their destination in a way that minimizes
the cost of their route, where the cost can capture, e.g., the amount of time or resources required. The eponymous congestionenters
the scene as follows: the cost accrued by a single agent when traversing a link in the network depends on the number of agents using
that link, as described by the link’s latency function. In essence, the latency function captures how the cost of using each link changes
✩ An extended abstract of this paper appeared in the proceedings of AAAI 2024 [9].
* Correspondingauthor.
E-mailaddress:fmcinern@gmail.com(F.McInerney).
1 Postal address: Technische Universität Wien, Favoritenstrasse 9-11, E192-01, 1040 Vienna, Austria.
2 The setting where there is an infinite number of agents and single agents are infinitesimally small is called non-atomic; we focus on the classic, atomiccase, where
agentsareindividualentities.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2024.104241
Received 19 February 2024; Received in revised form 16 October 2024; Accepted 18 October 2024
Availableonline22October2024
0004-3702/© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

C.Brand,R.Ganian,S.Kalyanasundarametal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104241
depending on the number of agents using it; depending on the context, more agents using a link could lead to each of them paying
a greater cost (e.g., when dealing with traffic congestion) or a lower cost (e.g., when dealing with logistical supply chains), up to a
maximum capacity for that link.
It is well-known that selfish strategies in congestion games may not lead to optimal outcomes for all agents, let alone a system-
optimaloutcome3 (that is, one achieving the minimum average cost)[58]. In fact, the existence of Nash equilibria for these games
was the seminal question investigated by Rosenthal[54], and is still of interest in economics and game theory today. Notably, the
price of anarchyfor these games has by now been determined[5,12]. The price of anarchy in this context is defined as the ratio
cost(𝑆)
sup𝑆 ), (PoA)
cost(𝑆
sys
where the supremum ranges over all Nash equilibria, cost(𝑆)is the cost of a set of strategies 𝑆 for the agents, and 𝑆 is a system
sys
optimum, minimizing the average cost over all agents. In addition, the computational complexity of computing Nash equilibria is
equally well-studied[2,21]; see also the many recent works on the problem[36,61].
While the price of anarchy defined in(PoA)as well as the cost of Nash equilibria cost(𝑆)(i.e.,the numerator in(PoA)) has been
extensively treated in the literature on congestion games, it may come as a surprise that, to the best of our knowledge, almost nothing
is known about the computational complexity of computing the denominatorcost(𝑆 )of(PoA), that is, determining a system-optimal
sys
set of strategiesfor the players. Far from just an intellectual curiosity, applications, e.g., in road or internet traffic routing and planning,
make this a pressing question, especially given the rapid developments in autonomous driving systems and the widely adopted political
strategy of emphasizing public transportation for its lower environmental impact, which is usually centrally planned and routed, as
opposed to individual transport[11,39,57,59,60].
One possible reason for this gap may lie in the fact that even the most restricted instances of centrally routing a set of agents across
a network in a socially optimal manner become hopelessly hard from the perspective of classical computational complexity theory.
To illustrate the severity of this phenomenon, several of these basic classes of intractable instances are described in Section3. Another
explanation for this blind spot in the literature can possibly be found in the fact that, as far as the price of anarchy is concerned,
the network structure itself does not appear to play a significant role, whereas this changes drastically when it comes to actually
computing a system-optimal set of strategies.
A particular approach that has proven immensely useful for computationally intractable problems lies in employing the rich toolset
offered by parameterized complexity theory[14,17]in order to obtain a rigorous, more fine-grained and detailed description of the
computational complexity of a problem. The central aim of such an endeavoris to identify the structural properties of the input—
captured via numerical parameters—which give rise to fixed-parameter algorithms for the problem (see Section2). Some examples
where the parameterized complexity toolset has been successfully applied in the context of Artificial Intelligence research include
the series of works on Hedonic Games[7,8,24], Integer Programming[10,18,19,30], Data Completion[15,25,26,41], and Bayesian
Network Learning[28,34,35,50].
Our contributions As mentioned above, the problem of computing system-optimal strategies in atomic congestion games (SOAC)
is extremely hard in terms of classical complexity theory. The core approach of parameterized complexity analysis is to identify
those structural properties that a problem instance should have that, even though exceedingly hard in the general case, give rise
to its fixed-parameter tractability. Since the network is modeled as a graph, a natural first choice would be to parameterize by the
well-established treewidth(of the underlying undirected graph) [53]. Unfortunately, as our first result, we show that the problem
remains 𝖭𝖯-hard not only on networks which have treewidth 2, but even on networks consisting of a star plus an additional vertex
(Theorem1). This result rules out not only the use of treewidth, but also of virtually all other reasonable graph measures, as a single
parameter to solve the problem in full generality.
The above lower bound essentially means that, in order to achieve progress, one needs to combine structural parameters with
some auxiliary parameterization of the problem instances. In the context of congestion games, it would seem tempting to consider
the number of agents as such an auxiliary parameter, however that would severely restrict any obtained algorithms: while one could
reasonably expect that networks of interest may be well-structured, the number of agents in relevant instances of congestion games
is typically large, and hence, does not constitute a well-applicable parameter. Instead, here we consider the maximum capacity 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡
of a link in the network as an auxiliary parameter—a value which is never larger, but could be much lower, than the total number of
agents in the whole network.
It is important to note thatSOACremains extremely challenging even when parameterized by 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡. In fact, even if 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡is fixed to a
small constant, the problem is 𝖭𝖯-hard when restricted to networks of constant treewidth (Theorem2); the same reduction also rules
out the use of other network parameters based on decompositions along small vertex separators(such as treedepth[48]). However, as
we show in our main algorithmic result (Theorem5),SOACis fixed-parameter tractable when parameterized by 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡plus a suitable
measure that guarantees the network’s decomposability along small edge cuts.
Basic examples of such measures include the treewidth plus the maximum degree of the network [33,50], or the feedback edge
number(i.e., the edge deletion distance to acyclic networks)[23,42]. In our contribution, we build on the recently introduced spanning
treedecompositions[28,29]to provide a significantly more general result—in particular, we develop a highly non-trivial dynamic
programming algorithm to establish fixed-parameter tractability with respect to the recently introduced slim variant of treecut width.
3 In the literature, such outcomes are sometimes called the (socialor collective) optimum.
2

C.Brand,R.Ganian,S.Kalyanasundarametal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104241
Task
Routeall𝑚agents Route𝑚−𝛼agents
unbounded 𝚌 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡+𝛼 unbounded
𝚖𝚊𝚡
𝖭𝖯-hard 𝖭𝖯-hard
for 𝐾 2,𝑁 for 𝐾 2,𝑁
(Theorem1), bounded bounded (Theorem1),
tw,deg≤3 tw,deg≤3
(Theorem4) (Theorem4)
network network
parameter parameter
𝖭𝖯-hard vertex-sep. tw+deg tw
for td≤15 based 𝖥𝖯𝖳(The- 𝖭𝖯-hard for
(Theorem2) orem7) tw=1 [20]
edge-cutbased network
parameter
stcw
𝖭𝖯 -hard directed (alsotw 𝖥𝖯+ 𝖳de (Tg) he- tcw 𝖶[1]-hard
forDAGs
orem5) (Theorem6)
(Theorem3)
Fig.1.Amindmapofourresultsoncomputingsystem-optimalstrategiesincongestiongames.Theformalproblemdefinitionaswellasadiscussionoftheconsidered
parametersisprovidedinSection2;here,twstandsfortreewidth,degstandsformaximumdegree,tdstandsfortreedepth,(s)tcwstandsfor(slim)treecutwidth,and
DAGsstandsfordirectedacyclicgraphs.
We complement Theorem5with lower bounds (Theorems3, 4, and 6) that show the result to be an essentially tight delimitation of
the exact boundaries of tractability forSOAC.
In the final section of this article, we focus on a more general variant ofSOAC, where instead of requiring all agents to be routed
to their destinations, we ask to minimize the system optimum while routing as many agents as possible (or, equivalently, when at
most 𝛼agents may be left unrouted). This problem, motivated in part by similar lines of investigation conducted for, e.g., multi-agent
path finding[37]and vehicle routing[1,51], can be seen as a “min-max” variant ofSOAC, and hence, we denote itmSOAC. Crucially,
mSOACis even more challenging thanSOAC: it remains 𝖭𝖯-hard on bidirected trees even for 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡=1[20], and, perhaps even more
surprisingly, is left open on very simple network structures, such as bounded-capacity star networks, when parameterized by 𝛼. Be
that as it may, as our final result, we show that on bounded-degree networks, the spanning-tree based algorithm obtained forSOAC
can be lifted to also solvemSOACvia a fixed-parameter algorithm when parameterized by the treewidth of the network, along with
𝛼and 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡.
A mind-map of our results is provided in Fig.1.
2. Preliminaries
For a positive integer 𝑖 ∈ℕ, we let [𝑖] ={1, 2, … , 𝑖}. We refer to the book by Diestel[16]for standard graph terminology. While
the networks are modeled as directed graphs (i.e., digraphs), many of our results use the skeletons (i.e., the underlying undirected
graphs) of these digraphs. The skeleton𝐺of a directed graph 𝐺is the simple undirected graph obtained by replacing each arc in 𝐺
by an undirected edge. The graph class 𝐾 𝑖,𝑁={𝐾 𝑖,𝑗 |𝑗∈ℕ}is the class of all complete bipartite graphs where one side has size 𝑖.
Formal problem definition Given a digraph 𝐺=(𝑉, 𝐸), let  be the set of all directed paths in 𝐺. Given a set 𝐴 ={𝑎 1, … , 𝑎 𝑚}of
agents where each agent 𝑎 𝑖is associated with a tuple (𝑠 𝑖, 𝑡 𝑖) ∈𝑉2, a flow assignment𝐹 is a mapping from 𝐴to such that each agent
𝑎 𝑖 is mapped to a directed path from 𝑠 𝑖 to 𝑡 𝑖. For an arc 𝑒 ∈𝐸, let 𝑓 𝐹(𝑒) =|{𝑎|𝑎 ∈𝐴 ∧𝑒 ∈𝐹(𝑎)}|be the number of agents whose
flow passes through 𝑒; when 𝐹 is clear from the context, we omit it and simply use 𝑓(𝑒)instead.
Intuitively, our primary problem of interest asks to compute a flow assignment of all the agents that minimizes the total cost.
However, in order to formalize the algorithmic lower bounds obtained for the problem, we follow the standard practice of formulating
the problem as an equivalent decision problem (see below). To avoid any doubts, we remark that all our algorithmic results are
constructive and can also immediately output the minimum cost of a flow assignment with the required properties.
SystemOptimumAtomicCongestion(SOAC)
Input: A digraph 𝐺=(𝑉, 𝐸), a positive integer 𝜆, a set 𝐴 ={𝑎 1, … , 𝑎 𝑚}of agents where each agent 𝑎 𝑖is associated with a tuple
(𝑠 𝑖, 𝑡 𝑖) ∈𝑉2, and for each arc 𝑒 ∈𝐸, a latency function 𝓁 𝑒∶∑[𝑚] →ℝ ≥0∪{∞}.
Question: Does there exist a flow assignment 𝐹 such that 𝑒∈𝐸𝑓 𝐹(𝑒) ⋅𝓁 𝑒(𝑓 𝐹(𝑒)) ≤𝜆?
3

C.Brand,R.Ganian,S.Kalyanasundarametal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104241
treewidth Intractable
directedparameters
treedepth treecutwidth
slimtreecutwidth Fixed-parameter
tractable
treewidth+maxdegree feedbackedgenumber
Fig.2.A pictorial view of the tractability ofSOACwhen capacities are bounded. An arc from a parameter 𝑥to a parameter 𝑦indicates that 𝑥is dominated by 𝑦, i.e.,
a bound on 𝑥implies a bound on 𝑦but the opposite does not hold.
In specific settings studied in the literature, the latency function is sometimes required to satisfy certain additional conditions,
such as being non-decreasing. As illustrative examples, observe that when agents represent individual vehicles in a traffic network,
the latency function will typically be increasing (the cost of 100 agents using a single link is greater than 100 times the cost of that
link when it is used by a single agent), but if agents represent individual parcels or shipments in a logistics network, one would expect
it to be decreasing (the cost of 100 agents using a single link would be lower than 100 times the cost of that link when it is used
by a single agent). In order to capture as wide a range of scenarios as possible—including, e.g.,buffered or batch-wise processing at
network nodes leading to decreasing or even oscillating latencies, respectively—our study targets the problem with arbitrary latency
functions.
Given a latency function 𝓁 𝑒∶[𝑚] →ℝ ≥0∪{∞}for an arc 𝑒, let the capacity 𝑐 𝑒of 𝑒be defined as the maximum admissible value
of the latency function, i.e.,max{𝑧|𝓁 𝑒(𝑧) ≠∞}. Let the maximum capacityof a network be defined as 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡∶=max𝑒∈𝐸𝑐(𝑒). Crucially,
while the maximum capacity can never exceed the number 𝑚 of agents in the network, one can reasonably expect it to be much
smaller than 𝑚in more complex networks.
Parameterized complexity theory In parameterized complexity[14,17,49], the running-time of an algorithm is studied with respect
to a parameter 𝑘 ∈ℕand input size𝑛. The basic idea is to find a parameter that describes the structure of the instance such that the
combinatorial explosion can be confined to this parameter. In this respect, the most favorable complexity class is 𝖥𝖯𝖳(fixed-parameter
tractable), which contains all problems that can be decided by an algorithm running in time 𝑓(𝑘) ⋅𝑛(1), where 𝑓 is a computable
function. Algorithms with this running-time are called fixed-parameter algorithms. A basic way of excluding fixed-parameter tractability
for a parameterized problem is to show that it remains 𝖭𝖯-hard even when the parameter 𝑘is bounded by a constant. However, this is
not always possible: some problems can be solved in non-uniform polynomial time for each fixed value of the parameter. In these cases,
establishing hardness for the complexity class 𝖶[1]via a parameterized reductionrules out the existence of a fixed-parameter algorithm
under the well-established assumption that 𝖶[1] ≠𝖥𝖯𝖳. A parameterized reduction can be thought of as a classical polynomial-time
reduction, but with the distinction that it (1) can run in fixed-parameter time instead of polynomial time, and (2) must bound the
parameter of the output instance by a function of the parameter of the initial instance.
A natural and typical direction in parameterized complexity is to consider parameters tied to the structural properties of the
instance. In many cases, it turns out that achieving fixed-parameter tractability is only possible if one parameterizes by multiple
properties of the instances simultaneously; formally, this is simply reflected by setting the parameter to be the sum of both values.
As a basic example, the classicalIndependent Setproblem on graphs is not fixed-parameter tractable w.r.t. the size 𝓁of the sought
set nor the maximum degree 𝑑of the graph, but is well-known to admit a fixed-parameter algorithm w.r.t. 𝓁+𝑑[14].
Structural parameters In this work, we identify the exact boundaries of tractability forSOACin the context of fundamental graph
parameters, as depicted in Fig.2. For two of these parameters—notably treewidth[53]and treedepth[48]—we do not need to provide
explicit definitions since the respective lower bounds we obtain forSOACconstruct instances whose skeletons are well-known to have
bounded treewidth and treedepth. The feedback edge number[23,42]is simply the minimum number of edges that need to be removed
from an undirected graph in order to obtain a forest. The term “directed graph parameters” here broadly refers to all parameters that
achieve constant values on directed acyclic graphs; this includes directed treewidth[40], Kelly-width[38], and DAG-width[6], to
name a few.
The proofs of our main results forSOAC(Theorem5) andmSOAC(Theorem7), as well as the lower bound in Theorem6, will
require a more in-depth introduction of treecut width and its slim variant. A treecut decompositionof 𝐺is a pair (𝑇, )which consists
of a rooted tree 𝑇 and a near-partition ={𝑋 𝑡⊆𝑉(𝐺) ∶𝑡 ∈𝑉(𝑇)}of 𝑉(𝐺), where a near-partition is a partitioning of a set which
can also contain the empty set. A set in the family  is called a bagof the treecut decomposition.
For any node 𝑡of 𝑇 other than the root 𝑟, let 𝑒(𝑡) =𝑢𝑡be the unique edge incide⋃nt to 𝑡on t⋃he path to 𝑟. Let 𝑇𝑢 and 𝑇𝑡 be the two
connected components in 𝑇 −𝑒(𝑡)which contain 𝑢and 𝑡, respectively. Note that ( 𝑞∈𝑇𝑢𝑋 𝑞, 𝑞∈𝑇𝑡𝑋 𝑞)is a near-partition of 𝑉(𝐺),
and we use 𝐜𝐮𝐭(𝑡)to denote the set of edges with one endpoint in each part. We define the adhesionof 𝑡(𝐚𝐝𝐡 𝑇(𝑡)or 𝐚𝐝𝐡(𝑡)in brief)
as |𝐜𝐮𝐭(𝑡)|; if 𝑡is the root, we set 𝐚𝐝𝐡 𝑇(𝑡) =0and 𝐜𝐮𝐭(𝑡) =∅.
The torsoof a treecut decomposition (𝑇, )at a node 𝑡, written as 𝐻 𝑡, is the graph obtained from 𝐺as follows. If 𝑇 consists of a
single node 𝑡, then the torso of (𝑇, )at 𝑡is 𝐺. Otherwise, let 𝑇 1, … , 𝑇 𝓁 be the connected components of 𝑇−𝑡. For each 𝑖 =1, … , 𝓁,
4

C.Brand,R.Ganian,S.Kalyanasundarametal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104241
⋃
the vertex set 𝑍 𝑖⊆𝑉(𝐺)is defined as the set 𝑏∈𝑉(𝑇𝑖)𝑋 𝑏. The torso 𝐻 𝑡 at 𝑡is obtained from 𝐺by consolidatingeach vertex set 𝑍 𝑖
into a single vertex 𝑧 𝑖 (this is also called shrinkingin the literature). Here, the operation of consolidating a vertex set 𝑍 into 𝑧is to
substitute 𝑍 by 𝑧in 𝐺, and for each edge 𝑒between 𝑍 and 𝑣 ∈𝑉(𝐺) ⧵𝑍, adding an edge 𝑧𝑣in the new graph. We note that this
may create parallel edges.
The operation of suppressing a vertex 𝑣of degree at most 2consists of deleting𝑣, and when the degree is two, adding an edge
between the neighbors of 𝑣. Given a connected graph 𝐺and 𝑋⊆𝑉(𝐺), let the 3-centerof (𝐺, 𝑋)be the unique graph obtained from
𝐺by exhaustively suppressing vertices in 𝑉(𝐺) ⧵𝑋 of degree at most two. Finally, for a node 𝑡of 𝑇, we denote by 𝐻̃ 𝑡 the 3-center
of (𝐻 𝑡, 𝑋 𝑡), where 𝐻 𝑡is the torso of (𝑇, )at 𝑡. Let the torso-size𝐭𝐨𝐫(𝑡)denote |𝐻̃ 𝑡|.
Definition 1. The width of a treecut decomposition (𝑇, )of 𝐺is defined as max𝑡∈𝑉(𝑇){𝐚𝐝𝐡(𝑡), 𝐭𝐨𝐫(𝑡)}. The treecut width of 𝐺, or
𝐭𝐜𝐰(𝐺)in short, is the minimum width of (𝑇, )over all treecut decompositions (𝑇, )of 𝐺.
The graph parameter slim treecut width can be defined analogously to treecut width, but with the distinction that suppress-
ing only occurs for vertices of degree at most 1. Yet, for our algorithmic applications, it will be more useful to use a different
characterization of the parameter—one based on spanning trees and much better suited to the design of dynamic programming
algorithms.
For a graph 𝐺 and a tree 𝑇 over 𝑉(𝐺), let the local feedback edge number at 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉(𝐺) be 𝐸𝐺,𝑇 (𝑣) = {𝑢𝑤 ∈ 𝐸(𝐺) ⧵
loc
𝐸(𝑇)|thepathbetween𝑢and𝑤in𝑇 contains𝑣}. The edge-cut widthof the pair (𝐺, 𝑇)is 𝐞𝐜𝐰(𝐺, 𝑇) =1 +max𝑣∈𝑉 |𝐸 l𝐺 oc,𝑇 (𝑣)|.
Lemma 1 (Prop. 27 and Thm. 30, [29]). Every graph 𝐺with slim treecut width 𝑘admits a spanning tree 𝑇 over some supergraph 𝐺′of 𝐺
such that (𝐺′, 𝑇)has edge-cut width at most 3(𝑘 +1)2. Moreover, such a pair (𝐺′, 𝑇)can be computed in time 2𝑘(1)⋅|𝑉(𝐺)|4.
Lemma 2 (Prop. 22, Prop. 26, and Thm. 30,[29]). Every graph 𝐺 with maximum degree 𝑑 and treewidth 𝑤admits a spanning tree 𝑇
over some supergraph 𝐺′ of 𝐺such that both the edge-cut width of (𝐺′, 𝑇)and the maximum degree of 𝑇 are upper-bounded by (𝑑2𝑤2).
Moreover, such a pair (𝐺′, 𝑇)can be computed in time 2(𝑑𝑤)(1)⋅|𝑉(𝐺)|4.
We refer to the work that introduced the notion[29]for a broader discussion of slim treecut width, as well as illustrative figures.
3. The surprising difficulty of solving atomic congestion games
Before initializing our more fine-grained parameterized analysis ofSOAC, we first consider the computational complexity of the
problem from the classical point of view, that is, with respect to 𝖭𝖯-hardness. In fact, we show that even surprisingly simple input
instances turn out to be intractable.
To begin, we show thatSOACis 𝖭𝖯-hard even when the underlying undirected graph of the input digraph is restricted to the class
𝐾 2,𝑁. We prove this result (as well as Theorem4later on) via a reduction from the following variant of the classicalSubset Sum
problem over 𝑑-dimensional vectors:
MultidimensionalUniform0/1Knapsack(MUKS)
Input: A set 𝑆={𝑣⃗ 1, … , 𝑣⃗ 𝑛} ⊆ℕ𝑑 of 𝑑-dimensional vectors containing natural numbers, a positive integer 𝑘, and a target vector
𝑇⃗ ∈ℕ𝑑
. ∑
Question: Is there a subset 𝑆′⊆𝑆 of at least 𝑘vectors such that 𝑠⃗∈𝑆′𝑠⃗≤𝑇⃗ ?
Lemma 3. MUKSis 𝖭𝖯-hard and also 𝖶[1]-hard parameterized by 𝑑, even if all numbers are encoded in unary.
Proof. The reduction proceeds from a problem calledMultidimensional Relaxed Subset Sum(MRSS), which is 𝖭𝖯-hard even
if the inputs are encoded in unary[32]. In its definition, it subtly differs from MUKS above. Namely, the direction of the inequal-
ities is swapped,∑ that is, one seeks a subset of at most 𝑘 vectors that sums up to at least 𝑇⃗ . Now, given an instance (𝑆, 𝑇⃗, 𝑘) of
MRSS, let Σ⃗ ∶= 𝑠∈𝑆𝑠 be the total sum over all vectors. The instance of MUKS then consists of (𝑆, Σ⃗ −𝑇⃗, 𝑛 −𝑘). We claim that
the MUKS instance h∑as a solution of size at least 𝑛 −∑𝑘 if and only if the original MRSS-instance has a solution of ∑size at most 𝑘.
Indeed, for 𝑆′⊆𝑆, 𝑠∈𝑆′𝑠 ≥𝑇⃗ is equivalent to Σ⃗ − 𝑠∈𝑆′𝑠 ≤Σ⃗ −𝑇⃗ , and, by definition, the left-hand side equals 𝑠∈𝑆′′𝑠, where
𝑆′′=𝑆−𝑆′ is a set of at least 𝑛 −𝑘 vectors. This proves the correctness of the reduction, and hence, the 𝖭𝖯-hardness on unary
inputs.
As for the 𝖶[1]-hardness of the problem, we note that MRSS is also known to be 𝖶[1]-hard when parameterized by 𝑑 [32]. Our
polynomial-time reduction does not change the value of 𝑑, and hence, it immediately also establishes the 𝖶[1]-hardness of MUKS
w.r.t. 𝑑. □
Before proceeding to the reduction, let us briefly remark on the significance of the result in the context of this article. Essentially,
establishing 𝖭𝖯-hardness on 𝐾 2,𝑁 rules out not only fixed-parameter tractability under almost all commonly considered graph pa-
rameterizations (including not only the classical treewidth[53], but also the treedepth[48], the vertex cover number[43], and the more
5

C.Brand,R.Ganian,S.Kalyanasundarametal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104241
recently introduced edge-cut variants of treewidth like the treecut width [46]), but even polynomial-time algorithms for instances
where such parameters are bounded by a constant.
Theorem 1. SOACis 𝖭𝖯-hard even when restricted to networks whose skeletons belong to the class 𝐾 2,𝑁.
Proof. We provide a polynomial-time reduction from MUKS where numbers are encoded in unary toSOAC. Recall that MUKS is
𝖭𝖯-hard by Lemma3. The reduction is as follows. For every input 𝑣⃗ 𝑖∈𝑆 in the MUKS instance, there is a source vertex 𝑠 𝑖. For each
of the 𝑑 entries 𝑇 1, … , 𝑇 𝑑 in the target vector 𝑇⃗ , there is a target vertex 𝑡 𝑗. There are also two vertices ℎ 0 and ℎ 1. Each of the 𝑛
s 𝓁o 𝑠u 𝑖,ℎr 1c (e 𝑥 v ) e =rt 1ic ∕e 𝑥s f𝑠 o𝑖 r i as llc o an rcn se (c 𝑠t 𝑖e , d ℎ 1b )y . Bo ou tt hg o ℎi 0n ag n a dr c ℎs 1 t ho a b vo et oh u ℎ tg0 oa inn gd aℎ r1 c. s T toh e a ll la tt he en c taie rs g ea tr ve ed re tifi cn ese d 𝑡 𝑗 .a Fs o𝓁 r𝑠 a𝑖,ℎ rc0 s= (ℎ0 0,f o 𝑡 𝑗r ) ,a 𝓁ll ℎ a 0r ,𝑡c 𝑗s (𝑥 ( )𝑠 =𝑖, ℎ 00 i) f, 𝑥a n ≤d 𝑇 a 𝑗s ,
and otherwise, 𝓁 ℎ 0,𝑡𝑗(𝑥) =∞. That is, the capacity of the arc (ℎ 0, 𝑡 𝑗)is equal to 𝑇 𝑗, for each 𝑗∈[𝑑]. For arcs (ℎ 1, 𝑡 𝑗), 𝓁 ℎ 1,𝑡𝑗(𝑥) =0.
For the 𝑖-th input vector 𝑣⃗ 𝑖, let 𝑣 𝑖,𝑗 be its 𝑗-th entry. For all 𝑖 ∈[𝑛]and 𝑗∈[𝑑], we want to route 𝑣 𝑖,𝑗 agents from 𝑠 𝑖to 𝑡 𝑗. That is,
there are 𝑣 𝑖,𝑗 copies of the pair (𝑠 𝑖, 𝑡 𝑗)for all 𝑖 ∈[𝑛]and 𝑗∈[𝑑].
We claim that there is a solution of cost at most 𝑛 −𝑘if and only if the original instance ofMUKShas a solution comprised of at
least 𝑘vectors. First, any solution 𝑆′⊂𝑆forMUKStranslates immediately into a solution of cost at most 𝑛 −𝑘: the choice of latency
𝓁 𝑒(𝑥) =1∕𝑥ensures that 𝑓(𝑒)𝓁 𝑒(𝑓(𝑒)) =𝑥 ⋅1∕𝑥 =1, where 𝑓(𝑒) =𝑥. Hence, the cost of a solution is just 𝑛 −𝑔, where 𝑔is the number
of distinct originsfrom which allagents are routed over ℎ (since every origin for which at least one agent is routed via ℎ adds 1to
0 1
the cost). Therefore, by construction, routing all agents from every 𝑠 𝑖 via ℎ 0 whenever 𝑣⃗ 𝑖∈𝑆′ transforms 𝑆′ into a solution of cost
at most 𝑛 −𝑘; in particular, the capacities of the edges from ℎ are respected.
0
On the other hand, suppose we are given a set of strategies of total cost at most 𝑛 −𝑘. This means that there are precisely 𝑣 𝑖,𝑗
agents routed from 𝑠 𝑖 to 𝑡 𝑗 for all 𝑖 ∈[𝑛]and 𝑗∈[𝑑]. Again, by the property of the latency function 1∕𝑥, there is a solution to the
instance of SOACof equal cost such that either none or all of the agents from a single origin are routed via ℎ . For, suppose no
1
agents are routed via ℎ , then there is nothing to show. Otherwise, if at least one agent is routed via ℎ , then the cost added by this
1 1
is already 1, and routing all the remaining agents that originate in the same origin via ℎ will not add costs (and can only ever relax
1
the capacity constraints). Hence, we can assume that all the agents from the same origin travel along the same vertex ℎ 𝑖for 𝑖 ∈{0, 1}
to their respective destinations in the solution. But, this means that there are at least 𝑘distinct origins that can be routed via ℎ and
0
respect the capacity constraints, and hence, form a valid solution for theMUKSinstance.
To complete the proof, note that the skeleton of the digraph in the constructed instance ofSOACabove is 𝐾 2,𝑑+𝑛. □
Since Theorem 1 essentially rules out fixed-parameter algorithms based on structural network parameters alone, we turn our
attention to parameterizing by the maximum capacity 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡. As our first result in this direction, we show thatSOACremains 𝖭𝖯-hard
on networks of constant treewidth, even if the maximum capacity of a link is just 1. This is done via a reduction from the following
classical graph problem.
Edge-DisjointPaths(EDP)
Input: A graph 𝐺and a set 𝑃 of terminal pairs, that is, a set of subsets of 𝑉(𝐺)of size two.
Question: Is there a set of pairwise edge-disjoint paths connecting each set of terminal pairs in 𝑃?
Theorem 2. SOACis 𝖭𝖯-hard even when restricted to networks with 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡=1and whose skeletons have treewidth or treedepth at most 15.
Proof. It is known thatEDPis 𝖭𝖯-hard when restricted to the class 𝐾 3,𝑁 [22]. The reduction takes an instance  of EDPon 𝐾 3,𝑁
and replaces each edge 𝑢𝑣in the 𝐾 3,𝑛from with the gadget depicted in Fig.3(left), obtaining a digraph 𝐺′. We now complete the
construction of the instance ′obtained from . First, the latency functions are set so that the capacity of each arc in 𝐺′is set to one,
and a flow of at most one costs nothing, that is, for each 𝑒 ∈𝐸(𝐺′)and 𝑥 ∈ℕ,
{
0if𝑥≤1
𝓁 𝑒(𝑥)=
∞otherwise.
Then, for each terminal pair (𝑠, 𝑡)in 𝑃 in , we want to route 1agent from 𝑠to 𝑡in 𝐺′. This completes the construction of ′. By
construction, given two vertices 𝑢, 𝑣 ∈𝑉(𝐺′)connected by an arc gadget, it is only possible to route at most one agent from 𝑢to 𝑣or
from 𝑣to 𝑢via this arc gadget. Due to the capacity of each arc in 𝐺′ being 1, we then obtain the desired equivalence. That is, there
is a solution to if and only if there is a solution of cost 0for ′.
To complete the proof, we observe that the obtained network contains a bounded-sized set 𝑋 of vertices (in our case, the part
of size 3in the 𝐾 3,𝑛) such that deleting 𝑋 decomposes the rest of the network into connected components each containing at most
𝑦vertices (in our case 𝑦 =13, as each such component consists of a vertex connected to 3copies of the gadget depicted in Fig.3
(left). It is well-known (and also easy to see from their formal definitions[14,48,53]) that such graphs have treewidth and treedepth
upper-bounded by |𝑋| +𝑦 −1(i.e., 15). □
6

C.Brand,R.Ganian,S.Kalyanasundarametal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104241
𝑐
𝑥 1
1
.
. .
. .
.
𝑢 𝑣 𝑥𝑖 𝑐𝑗
.
. .
. .
.
𝑥𝑛
𝑐𝑚
Fig.3.The arc gadget replacing each undirected edge 𝑢𝑣in the reductions from the proofs of Theorems2and6(left), and the digraph constructed in the proof of
Theorem3(right).
Theorem2rules out using classic vertex-separator based parameters like treewidth, pathwidth or treedepth to solve SOAC, even
when 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡=1. All of these parameters are tied to the skeleton of the network and do not account for the orientations of the arcs.
One could wonder whether structural parameters introduced specifically for directed graphs would be better suited for the task.
The unifying feature of the most widely studied of these parameters[6,38,40]is that they achieve constant values—typically 1—on
directed acyclic graphs (DAGs). Below, we show that bounded-capacitySOACis 𝖭𝖯-hard even on simple DAGs, ruling out the use of
these directed network parameters.
Theorem 3. SOACis 𝖭𝖯-hard even when restricted to networks which are DAGs, have 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡=3, and whose skeletons have maximum degree4.
Proof. We reduce from a variant of SAT known as monotone cubic exact 1-in-3 SAT, which is known to be 𝖭𝖯-hard[52,55]. Here,
clauses have size three and must be satisfied by a single literal, each variable appears in three clauses, and all literals are positive.
Suppose we are given such an 𝑛-variate 𝑚-clause positive cubic 3-CNF formula 𝜑. The instance ofSOACis constructed as follows.
It contains the sets of vertices 𝑋={𝑥 1, … , 𝑥 𝑛}and 𝐶={𝑐 1, … , 𝑐 𝑚}that are identified with the variables and clauses appearing in 𝜑,
respectively. We also add two more copies of 𝑋, namely 𝑋𝑇 ={𝑥𝑇 1, … , 𝑥𝑇 𝑛}and 𝑋𝐹 ={𝑥𝐹 1, … , 𝑥𝐹 𝑛}, and, similarly, two more copies
𝐶𝑇 and 𝐶𝐹 of 𝐶. Now, 𝑥 𝑖has an arc to 𝑥𝑇 𝑖 and one to 𝑥𝐹 𝑖 , both with latency 𝓁(1) =𝓁(2) =1and 𝓁(3) =0, and capacity 3. Whenever
𝑥 𝑖 appears in the 𝑗-th clause of 𝜑, then 𝑥𝑇 𝑖 has an arc to 𝑐 𝑗𝑇 and 𝑥𝐹 𝑖 has an arc to 𝑐 𝑗𝐹 , both of latency 0. Further, 𝑐 𝑖𝑇 has an arc to 𝑐 𝑖
of capacity 1and 𝑐 𝑖𝐹 has an arc to 𝑐 𝑖of capacity 2, for all 𝑖 ∈[𝑚], and latency 0otherwise. If 𝑥 𝑖appears in the 𝑗-th clause of 𝜑, then
there is an agent with origin 𝑥 𝑖and destination 𝑐 𝑗. An illustration of the construction is provided in Fig.3(right).
We claim that this instance ofSOAChas a solution of cost 0if and only if 𝜑is 1-in-3-satisfiable. Any satisfying 1-in-3 assignment
of 𝜑induces a routing of agents of cost 0by construction. On the other hand, take any solution of cost 0toSOAC. This means, first,
that all agents with origin 𝑥 𝑖are routed via the same choice of 𝑥𝑇 𝑖 or 𝑥𝐹 𝑖 by the respective latency functions of these arcs. In particular,
we can derive an assignment 𝜋 to the variables from this information, and we claim that it is in fact a satisfying 1-in-3 assignment.
Towards showing that 𝜋 is satisfying, observe that, by the capacity constraints on the arc from 𝑐 𝑗𝐹 to 𝑐 𝑗, for every clause, at most 2
variables can use the incoming arcs into 𝑐 𝑗𝐹 from vertices 𝑥𝐹 𝑖 . Further, by the capacity constraints on the arc from 𝑐 𝑗𝑇 to 𝑐 𝑗, for every
clause, at most 1variable can use the incoming arcs into 𝑐 𝑗𝑇 from vertices 𝑥𝑇 𝑖 . Hence, exactly one of the agents must be routed via
𝑐 𝑗𝑇 , coming from a vertex 𝑥𝑇 𝑖 . Thus, every clause is satisfied by 𝜋and 𝜋is also a 1-in-3 assignment of 𝜑.
Note that the produced instance has the desired properties from the statement of the theorem by the fact that 𝜑was assumed to
be cubic. □
In fact, we can also show that our problem of interest remains intractable even on extremely simple networks which are DAGs
(complementing Theorem1).
Theorem 4. SOACis 𝖭𝖯-hard even when restricted to DAGs whose skeletons are planar graphs with treewidth and maximum degree both
upper-bounded by 3.
Proof. To prove the statement of the theorem, we present a reduction fromMUKStoSOAC. Starting with an instance  of MUKS
encoded in unary, we construct an instance ′ofSOACas follows.
For each 𝑣⃗ 𝑖∈𝑆(𝑖 ∈[𝑛]) in , there is a source vertex 𝑠 𝑖in ′. For each entry 𝑇 𝑗∈𝑇⃗ (𝑗∈[𝑑]) in the target vector in , there is a
terminal vertex 𝑡 𝑗 in ′. The rest of ′is constructed as follows. There are two vertices ℎ 𝑖and ℎ′ 𝑖for each 𝑖 ∈[𝑛 +1]. For each 𝑖 ∈[𝑛],
there are the arcs (ℎ 𝑖, ℎ 𝑖+1), (ℎ′ 𝑖, ℎ′ 𝑖+1), (𝑠 𝑖, ℎ 𝑖), and (𝑠 𝑖, ℎ′ 𝑖). There is a directed almost complete binary tree (the level with the leaves
may not be completely filled) whose arcs go from the root to the leaves with ℎ 𝑛+1(ℎ′ 𝑛+1, respectively) as the root and 𝑡 1, … , 𝑡 𝑑 as the
leaves. The two directed almost complete binary trees are symmetric with respect to the leaves.
For each 𝑖 ∈[𝑛] and 𝑥 ∈ℕ, let 𝓁 (𝑠𝑖,ℎ′ 𝑖)(𝑥) =1∕𝑥. For each 𝑗∈[𝑑], let 𝑒 𝑗 be the arc incoming into 𝑡 𝑗 from the directed almost
complete binary tree with ℎ 𝑛+1as the root, and, for each 𝑥 ∈ℕ, let
{
𝓁 𝑒𝑗(𝑥)= ∞0if o𝑥 th≤ er𝑇 w𝑗
ise.
7

C.Brand,R.Ganian,S.Kalyanasundarametal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104241
Fig.4.ThedigraphconstructedintheproofofTheorem4.
In other words, for each 𝑗∈[𝑑], the capacity of the arc 𝑒 𝑗 is equal to 𝑇 𝑗. For each remaining arc 𝑒for which a latency function has
not yet been defined, let 𝓁 𝑒(𝑥) =0for each 𝑥 ∈ℕ.
For each 𝑣⃗ 𝑖∈𝑆 (𝑖 ∈[𝑛]) and 𝑗∈[𝑑], we want to route 𝑣 𝑖,𝑗 agents from 𝑠 𝑖 to 𝑡 𝑗, where 𝑣 𝑖,𝑗 is the 𝑗-th entry of 𝑣⃗ 𝑖. That is, there
are 𝑣 𝑖,𝑗 copies of the tuple (𝑠 𝑖, 𝑡 𝑗) for each 𝑖 ∈[𝑛] and 𝑗∈[𝑑]. This completes the construction of ′, which is clearly achieved in
polynomial time. See Fig.4for an illustration.
We now show that there is a solution comprised of at least 𝑘vectors for  if and only if there is a solution of cost at most 𝑛 −𝑘
for ′. First, assume there is a solution comprised of at least 𝑘 vectors for . For each of the vertices 𝑠 𝑖 corresponding to one of
these at least 𝑘vectors in the solution for , route each of the agents at 𝑠 𝑖to their corresponding destination 𝑡 𝑗 via the directed path
that contains ℎ 𝑖. Since these vectors are in the solution for , for each 𝑗∈[𝑑], the capacity of the arc 𝑒 𝑗 has not been surpassed,
and thus, so far, the cost of routing these agents is 0 by the construction. The remaining agents are all routed to the 𝑡 𝑗’s via the
directed path that contains ℎ′ 𝑛+1. Since, for each 𝑖 ∈[𝑛]and 𝑥 ∈ℕ, we have that 𝓁 𝑒(𝑥) =1∕𝑥for any arc 𝑒of the form (𝑠 𝑖, ℎ′ 𝑖), then
𝑓(𝑒)𝓁 𝑒(𝑓(𝑒)) =𝑥 ⋅1∕𝑥 =1, where 𝑓(𝑒) =𝑥. Hence, the cost of a solution for ′is at most 𝑛 −𝑘since there are at most 𝑛 −𝑘such 𝑠 𝑖’s
where agents are routed to their destinations via ℎ′ , and the only arcs on these directed paths that have non-zero latency are the
𝑛+1
ones of the form (𝑠 𝑖, ℎ′ 𝑖).
Now, suppose we are given a solution for ′of total cost at most 𝑛 −𝑘. By the property of the latency function 1∕𝑥for any arc of
the form (𝑠 𝑖, ℎ′ 𝑖), this means that there at most 𝑛 −𝑘vertices in {ℎ′ 1, … , ℎ′ 𝑛}that had agents routed to them through their incoming
arc from 𝑠 𝑖. Hence, for at least 𝑘of the vertices in 𝑠 1, … , 𝑠 𝑛, all of their agents must have been routed to the 𝑡 𝑗’s via the 𝑒 𝑗’s. Since
the total cost of the solution for ′is at most 𝑛 −𝑘(not ∞), then, for each 𝑗∈[𝑑], the capacity 𝑇 𝑗 of the arc 𝑒 𝑗 was not surpassed by
this routing. Hence, the sum of the vectors corresponding to these at least 𝑘vertices in 𝑠 1, … , 𝑠 𝑛must be at most 𝑇⃗ .
It now remains to show that the digraph in ′ has the desired properties from the theorem statement. It is trivial to see that the
digraph in ′is a planar DAG, and that its skeleton has maximum degree3. To show that the treewidth of its skeleton is at most3, we
give a strategy for four cops to capture the robber in the equivalent cops and robbers definition of treewidth: a graph 𝐺has treewidth
𝑘if and only if the minimum number of cops that can ensure capturing the robber in 𝐺is 𝑘 +1[56].
The four cops first occupy ℎ 𝑛+1, ℎ′ 𝑛+1, 𝑠 𝑛, and ℎ 𝑛, respectively. If the robber occupies an 𝑠 𝑖, ℎ 𝑖 or ℎ′ 𝑖 vertex, then it is easy to see
that the cops can capture the robber. Thus, assume that the robber territory is restricted to the two almost complete binary trees that
are joined at the leaves minus their roots. The first and second cops occupy ℎ 𝑛+1 and ℎ′ 𝑛+1, respectively. The third and fourth cops
move to a child of the first and second cops, respectively. Let the first and third cop be one team of cops, and let the second and
fourth cops be the other team of cops. From this point on, the teams of cops play in an alternating fashion. The first and third (the
second and fourth, respectively) cops then apply the following well-known winning strategy for two cops in their respective tree[56]:
at each point of time the two cops will occupy two pairwise adjacent vertices in the tree, and in each round the cop occupying the
vertex closer to the root will move to a child of the other cop in the direction of the robber if the robber is located in their tree. If the
robber is located in the other tree, the strategy is the same but we attempt to catch the “shadow” of the robber in their subtree, where
the robber’s shadow is simply the vertex corresponding to the robber’s position in the mirroring almost complete binary tree. □
4. A fixed-parameter algorithm forSOAC
Recapitulating the results so far, in view of Theorem1, we are focusing our efforts on identifying structural properties of networks
which would allow us to solveSOACon bounded-capacity networks. Theorem2rules out tractability via standard vertex-separator
based graph parameters, while Theorem3excludes the use of commonly studied directed variants of network parameters. A notable
class of structural measures that has not been addressed yet by the obtained lower bounds are parameters that are tied to the existence
of edge cutsas opposed to vertex separators.
8

C.Brand,R.Ganian,S.Kalyanasundarametal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104241
Two “baseline” graph measures which allow for a structural decomposition along bounded-sized edge cuts are the feedback edge
number (𝚏𝚎𝚗)[23,42], and the combined parameter of treewidth plus maximum degree (𝚝𝚠𝚍)[33,50]. Unfortunately, both of these
measures place very strong restrictions on the network: the former is only small on networks whose skeletons are trees plus a small
number of arcs, while the latter cannot be used on networks with high-degree nodes.
As our main algorithmic contribution, we establish fixed-parameter tractability of bounded-capacity SOAC with respect to a
recently introduced edge-cut based parameter called slim treecut width(𝚜𝚝𝚌𝚠)[29]. Crucially, this result immediately implies and
generalizes fixed-parameter tractability with respect to either 𝚏𝚎𝚗 or 𝚝𝚠𝚍, while also circumventing both of the aforementioned
shortcomings: networks with skeletons of bounded slim treecut width can have high degree as well as be significantly more complex
than just a tree.
Theorem 5. SOACis fixed-parameter tractable when parameterized by the slim treecut width of the skeleton 𝐺of the input digraph 𝐺plus
the maximum capacity 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡.
Proof. We begin by invoking Lemma1to compute a pair (𝐻, 𝑇)such that 𝐻 is a supergraph of 𝐺and (𝐻, 𝑇)has edge-cut width
𝑘 ≤3 ⋅(𝜅+1)2, where 𝜅 is the slim treecut width of 𝐺. Our algorithm is based on a leaf-to-root dynamic programming procedure
that traverses 𝑇 while storing certain (carefully defined and bounded-sized) records about the part of 𝑇 that has been processed so
far. To this end, it will be useful to assume that 𝑇 is rooted, and thus, we mark an arbitrary leaf of 𝑇 as the root and denote it𝑟.
Before we define the records used in the dynamic program, we will need some terminology. For a vertex 𝑣 ∈𝑉(𝐻)with a child
𝑤 ∈𝑉(𝐻), we say that 𝑤is a simplechild of 𝑣if 𝑣and 𝑤belong to different connected components of 𝐻−𝑣𝑤; otherwise, we say
that 𝑤 is a complexchild of 𝑣. Observe that, while the number of simple children of 𝑣 is not bounded by 𝑘(none of the subtrees
rooted at simple children contain any edges in 𝐸𝐻,𝑇 (𝑣)), the number of complex children of 𝑣is upper-bounded by 2𝑘(each subtree
loc
rooted at a complex child contains an endpoint of at least one edge in 𝐸 l𝐻 oc,𝑇 (𝑣)). Furthermore, we use  𝑣 to denote the sub-digraph
of 𝐺induced on the vertices that are descendants of 𝑣(including 𝑣itself), and 𝜕 𝑣to denote those arcs of 𝐺which have precisely one
endpoint in  𝑣; recall that |𝜕 𝑣| ≤2(𝑘 +1). An agent 𝑎 𝑖is outgoingfor 𝑣if 𝑠 𝑖∈ 𝑣and, at the same time, 𝑡 𝑖∉ 𝑣. Similarly, an agent 𝑎 𝑖
is incomingfor 𝑣if 𝑠 𝑖∉ 𝑣and, at the same time, 𝑡 𝑖∈ 𝑣.
We are now ready to formalize the dynamic programming records used in our algorithm. A snapshotat a vertex 𝑣is a tuple of the
form ( ,  , , ), where:
out in
•  outis a mapping from the set of all outgoing agents for 𝑣to arcs in 𝜕 𝑣which are outgoing from  𝑣;
•  inis a mapping from the set of all incoming agents for 𝑣to arcs in 𝜕 𝑣which are incoming to  𝑣;
• is a multiset of pairs (𝑒, 𝑓)such that 𝑒is an incoming arc into  𝑣, 𝑓 is an outgoing arc from  𝑣, and 𝑒𝑓 is not a 2-cycle;
• is a multiset of pairs (𝑒, 𝑓)such that 𝑒is an outgoing arc from  𝑣, 𝑓 is an incoming arc into  𝑣, and 𝑒𝑓 is not a 2-cycle;
• each arc in 𝜕 𝑣may only appear in at most 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡tuples over all of the entries in  out,  in, , .
Before proceeding, it will be useful to obtain an upper-bound on the total number of possible snapshots for an arbitrary vertex
𝑣. First, we observe that if the number of outgoing agents for 𝑣exceeds 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡⋅(𝑘 +1), then every flow assignment in the considered
instance must necessarily exceed the capacity 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡 for at least one arc in 𝐺; in other words, such an instance can be immediately
recognized as a NO-instance. The same also holds for the number of incoming agents for 𝑣. Hence, we can restrict our attention to
the case where these simple checks do not fail, and use this to obtain a bound on the total number of snapshots at 𝑣. In particular,
there are at most (2𝑘 +2)𝚌𝚖𝚊𝚡⋅(𝑘+1)possible choices for each of  outand  in(there are at most 2𝑘 +2choices of which element of 𝜕 𝑣to
map each of the at most 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡⋅(𝑘 +1)many agents to), and also at most (𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡+1)4(𝑘+1)2 possible choices for and each (for each
of the at most 4(𝑘 +1)2possible unordered pairs of arcs from 𝜕 𝑣, there are (𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡+1)possible choices of how many times it occurs in
and ). We conclude that the number of snapshots at 𝑣can be upper-bounded by (𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡+𝑘)(𝚌𝚖𝚊𝚡𝑘2), and let Snap(𝑣)denote the
set of all possible snapshots at 𝑣.
We can now formalize the syntax of the record at 𝑣, denoted Record(𝑣), as a mapping from Snap(𝑣) to ℝ ≥0∪{∞}. As for the
semantics, Record(𝑣)will capture the minimum cost required to (1) route the outgoing and incoming agents to the designated arcs
in  outand  in, while assuming that (2) some (unidentified and arbitrary) agents will use arcs of 𝜕 𝑣 to enter and then exit  𝑣via the
arcs designated in , and that (3) some (unidentified and arbitrary) agents will use arcs of 𝜕 𝑣 to exit and then return to  𝑣 via the
arcs designated in. Formally, Record(𝑣)maps each snapshot Υ =( ,  , , )to the minimum cost of a flow assignment 𝐹 in
out in
the subinstance  Υinduced on the vertices of  𝑣plus the arcs4of 𝜕 𝑣with the following properties:
1. for each pair (𝑎𝑏, 𝑐𝑑)of arcs in the multiset such that 𝑏, 𝑐∈ 𝑣, we add a new marker agent into 𝐼 Υwhich starts at 𝑎and ends
at 𝑑;
2. for each pair (𝑎𝑏, 𝑐𝑑)of arcs in the multiset such that 𝑎, 𝑑∈ 𝑣, we add a new arc 𝑏𝑐 into  and set 𝓁 𝑏𝑐∶={1 ↦0} ∪{𝑖 ↦
Υ
∞|𝑖 >1}.
3. for each outgoing agent 𝑎 𝑖, 𝐹 contains a path from 𝑠 𝑖into the arc  out(𝑎 𝑖);
4. for each incoming agent 𝑎 𝑖, 𝐹 contains a path from (and including) the arc  in(𝑎 𝑖)to 𝑡 𝑖.
4 We remark that since only one of the endpoints of 𝜕 𝑣lies in  𝑣, these are not formally arcs in  𝑣.
9

C.Brand,R.Ganian,S.Kalyanasundarametal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104241
If no flow with these properties exists, we simply set Record(𝑣)(Υ) ∶=∞. This completes the formal definition of the records
Record(𝑣). Observe that, since  𝑟=𝐺and 𝜕 𝑟=∅, the only snapshot at 𝑟is Υ𝑟=({∅}, {∅}, ∅, ∅)and  is precisely the input instance
Υ𝑟
to our problem. Hence, if we successfully compute the record Record(𝑟)for the root vertex 𝑟, then Record(𝑟)(Υ𝑟)must be equal to
the minimum cost of a flow assignment 𝐹 in the input instance. Thus, to conclude the proof it remains to show how to compute the
records at each vertex in a leaf-to-root fashion.
Towards this task, let us first consider the computation of Record(𝑣)for a leaf 𝑣in 𝑇. Here, we observe that each of the constructed
instances  Υ consists of the at most 2𝑘 +2arcs in 𝜕 𝑣, and the at most (𝑘 +1) ⋅𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡 arcs obtained from . The number of paths in
such an instance is upper-bounded by 2(𝑘⋅𝚌𝚖𝚊𝚡), and hence, the minimum cost of a flow assignment 𝐹 in  can be computed by
Υ
enumerating all flow assignments in time at most 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡2(𝑘⋅𝚌𝚖𝚊𝚡) .
The core of the dynamic program lies in the computation of Record(𝑣) for a non-leaf vertex 𝑣. We do so by considering each
snapshot Υ =( ,  , , )at 𝑣independently, and computing the minimum cost of a flow assignment 𝐹 in the subinstance  as
out in Υ
f ao lll l oo uw ts g. F ino gr e aa gc eh ts si m fop rl e ch ai nld 𝑤 𝑤of 𝑣 a, pw se o llb is ne crv oe t ih na gt at gh ee nre i s oo rn 𝑤ly ta s tin hg el e s sn pa ep cs tih vo et uΨ n𝑤 iq= ue(  ao𝑤 ru ct s,  ini𝑤 n 𝜕, { 𝑤∅ } T, { h∅ is} ) coo rf 𝑤 espw oh ne dr se t o𝑤 tu ht em fa ap cs
o n 𝑤 d m a m ts f o re . r o t
in
that since a flow assignment is i∑nherently loopless, there is only a unique way it may pass through the arcs in 𝜕 𝑤. Let us define the
base cost of 𝑣, denoted 𝑏(𝑣), as 𝑤isasimplechildofvRecord(𝑤)(Ψ𝑤); intuitively, 𝑏(𝑣)captures the minimum cost required by a flow
assignment in all simple children of 𝑣.
Next, we construct the instance  for which we need to compute the minimum cost of a flow assignment. Essentially, our aim
Υ
is to compute this cost via brute-forcing over all possible flow assignments, but at first glance this seems infeasible since the size of
 is not bounded by our parameters. The core insight we use to overcome this is that even though  could be large, all but only
Υ Υ
a parameter-bounded number of interactions have already been taken into account in the records of the children of 𝑣. Formally, we
make use of this by constructing a “kernelized” instance +as follows:
Υ
First, for each simple child 𝑤of 𝑣, delete the whole subtree rooted at 𝑤, whereas, for each outgoing agent 𝑎 𝑖at 𝑤, we place 𝑠 𝑖on
𝑣, and, for each incoming agent 𝑎 𝑖at 𝑤, we place 𝑡 𝑖on 𝑣. Then, for each complex child 𝑤of 𝑣, we
1. delete every vertex in  𝑤except for the endpoints of 𝜕 𝑤;
2. for each pair of endpoints 𝑎, 𝑏 ∈𝑉( 𝑤)of distinct arcs in 𝜕 𝑤, add bi-directional “marker” arcs between 𝑎and 𝑏;
3. create a vertex 𝑤 out, add a directed arc from 𝑤 out to every endpoint of an arc 𝜕 𝑤 in 𝑉( 𝑤), and for outgoing agent 𝑎 𝑖 at 𝑤we
place 𝑠 𝑖on 𝑤 out;
4. create a vertex 𝑤 in, add a directed arc from every endpoint of an arc 𝜕 𝑤in 𝑉( 𝑤)to 𝑤 in, and for an incoming agent 𝑎 𝑖at 𝑤we
place 𝑡 𝑖on 𝑤 in.
We remark that the newly created arcs are not associated with a latency function (or alternatively may be assumed to be associated
with the degenerate latency function ℕ →{0}); these arcs are merely used as markers to point us to which of the snapshots should be
used for each complex child of 𝑣. Crucially, the number of vertices in +is upper-bounded by (𝑘 ⋅2𝑘) +1 ≤(𝑘2). The number of paths
Υ
𝑘(𝑘2),
in such an instance is upper-bounded by and hence, the total number of all possible flow assignments can be upper-bounded
by 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡𝑘(𝑘2) . We proceed by enumerating the set of all potential flow assignments, and, for each such potential flow assignment, we
check whether it is indeed a flow assignment for the agents specified in +. If this check succeeds, we employ a further technical
Υ
check to ensure that each path in 𝑃 only contains a marker arc 𝑒in a complex child 𝑤if 𝑒is immediately preceded and also succeeded
by an arc in𝜕 𝑤.
For each flow assignment in +that passes the above checks and, for each complex child 𝑤of 𝑣, we observe that 𝐹 restricted to
Υ
the arcs with at most one endpoint in 𝑤fully determines (1) the first arc in 𝜕 𝑤 used by an outgoing agent for 𝑤, (2) the last arc in
𝜕 𝑤used by an incoming agent for 𝑤, (3) which pairs of arcs in 𝜕 𝑤 are used by paths to leave and subsequently re-enter  𝑤, and (4)
which pairs of arcs in 𝜕 𝑤are used by paths to∑ enter and subsequently leave  𝑤. This information hence identifies a unique snapshot
Ψ𝑤 of 𝑤. We define the cost of 𝐹 as 𝑏(𝑣) + 𝑤isacomplexchildof𝑣Record(𝑤)(Ψ𝑤 𝐹). Finally, we set Record(𝑣)(Υ)to be the minimum
𝐹
cost of a flow 𝐹 in +which satisfies the conditions stipulated in this paragraph; this concludes the description of the algorithm.
Υ
Apart from the time required to compute (𝐻, 𝑇), which is upper-bounded by 2𝜅(1) ⋅𝑛4, the running time of the algorithm can
be upper-bounded by the number of vertices in the input digraph times the cost of processing each vertex. The latter is dominated
by 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡𝑘(𝑘2) , i.e., 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡𝜅(𝜅4) . We remark that as with essentially all width-based dynamic programming routines, the algorithm can
be made constructive by performing a subsequent top-to-bottom computation in order to compute a specific flow assignment with
the claimed flow as a witness. To argue correctness, it hence remains to argue that if the input instance admits a flow assignment
𝑄of minimum cost, say 𝑝, then the algorithm will compute a flow assignment with the same cost 𝑝. Towards this goal, we observe
that at each vertex 𝑣considered in the leaf-to-root pass made by the dynamic program, 𝑄will correspond to a unique snapshot Υof
𝑣. At each leaf 𝑣of 𝑇, Record(𝑣)(Υ)must be equal to the cost incurred by 𝑄on the arcs in 𝜕 𝑣 due to the nature of our brute-force
computation of the records for trees and the optimality of 𝑄. Moreover, for each non-leaf node 𝑣, it holds that as long as we have
correctly computed the records for each of its children, the traversal of 𝑄via the arcs in 𝜕 𝑣 and 𝜕 𝑤 for each child of 𝑤identifies a
u inn di eq eu de iv na cl uid afl o cw ta s os fi g 𝑏n (𝑣m e +nt∑ 𝐹 𝑤i isn  coΥ+ m, pa len xd ht ih ldis fi 𝑣n t eu cr on dd (e 𝑤fin )(e Ψs 𝐹a s on va ep rs h ao llt aΨ rc𝑤 if no r e Υa ,c ah c dh ei sld e𝑤 d.of □𝑣. In that case, however, 𝑄must
𝐹
r os ) R r 𝑤 ) s  s ir
a c o
We observe that the parameterization by 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡 cannot be dropped from Theorem 5 in view of the lower bound in Theorem4;
indeed, every network of bounded treewidth and maximum degree also has bounded slim treecut width (Lemma2). We conclude by
10

C.Brand,R.Ganian,S.Kalyanasundarametal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104241
turning our attention to whether Theorem5could be generalized to use the better-known treecut widthparameter instead of the slim
variant used in that algorithm. Treecut width is a structural graph parameter that also guarantees the decomposability of instances
via bounded-sized edge cuts, and has previously been used to establish tractability for several 𝖭𝖯-hard problems [27]. Crucially,
it forms an intermediary between the slim treecut width (which suffices for fixed-parameter tractability) and treewidth (for which
SOACremains intractable, even when restricted to bounded-capacity instances). We show that Theorem5is tight in the sense that
fixed-parameter tractability cannot be lifted to treecut width.
Theorem 6. SOAC is 𝖶[1]-hard when parameterized by the treecut width of the skeleton of the input network, even when restricted to
networks with 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡=1.
Proof. EDPis known to be 𝖶[1]-hard parameterized by the treecut width of the graph, even when restricted to the class 𝐾 3,𝑁 [31].
To establish the theorem, we use the same reduction as in the proof of Theorem2, and prove that the resulting instances also have
bounded treecut width. Let us consider an output network 𝐺′obtained from that reduction.
Since the input graph 𝐺has bounded treecut width, it suffices to show that replacing each of the edges in 𝐺 by the arc gadget
depicted in Fig. 3(left) does not increase the treecut width by too much. We actually prove that 𝐭𝐜𝐰(𝐺′) ≤𝐭𝐜𝐰(𝐺) since we can
assume that 𝐭𝐜𝐰(𝐺)can be assumed to be at least 5in the reduction from to ′.
Consider a treecut decomposition (𝑇, )of 𝐺of width 𝐭𝐜𝐰(𝐺) ≥5. From (𝑇, ), we will construct a treecut decomposition (𝑇′, ′)
of 𝐺′of width at most 𝐭𝐜𝐰(𝐺). Initially, set 𝑇′=𝑇 and ′=. Consider any edge 𝑢𝑣 ∈𝐸(𝐺)and let 𝑈⊂𝑉(𝐺′)be the four vertices
in the arc gadget connecting 𝑢and 𝑣in 𝐺′. If 𝑢and 𝑣are in 𝑋 𝑡 for some node 𝑡of 𝑇, then, in 𝑇′, we add a child 𝑡′ of 𝑡such that
𝑋 th𝑡 e′ = de𝑈 pt. I f 𝑢 𝑡a 2n id 𝑣 𝑇a ,r te i en ,𝑋 i𝑡 n1 𝑇an ′,d 𝑋 e𝑡 2 adfo dr at w cho d ldiff 𝑡′er oe fn 𝑡t n so ud ce hs t𝑡 h1 aa n 𝑋d 𝑡′𝑡 2 =o 𝑈f 𝑇 I, na n bd o, hw cit ah so eu s,t lo ′ss o uf pg de an te er da l ait cy c, t rh de nd ge lp yt .h of 𝑡 1is at least
h o f n h n w i t . t is o i
1
Let (𝑇′, ′)be the treecut decomposition of 𝐺′obtained from (𝑇, )by applying the above procedure for each edge in 𝐸(𝐺). For
each child 𝑡′ added to 𝑇 in the process of obtaining 𝑇′, there are exactly four vertices in 𝑋 𝑡′ and, in 𝐺′, they are only adjacent to
each other and two vertices 𝑢, 𝑣 ∈𝑋 𝑡 (𝑢 ∈𝑋 𝑡 and 𝑣 ∈𝑋 𝑡 , respectively) in the first (second, respectively) case. Thus, 𝐭𝐨𝐫(𝑡′) ≤5,
𝐚𝐝𝐡(𝑡′) ≤2, and the torso-size of any other no1 de in 𝑇′−𝑡′2 in (𝑇′, ′)is the same as in (𝑇, ). Indeed, this may only not be obvious
in the case of the torso-size of 𝑡in 𝑇′, but the vertex 𝑧, resulting from consolidating each vertex of 𝑋 𝑡′ into a single vertex, only has
degree2in 𝐺′, and thus, 𝑧will be suppressed and an edge will be added between 𝑢and 𝑣(which already exists in 𝐺) when forming
the 3-center of (𝐻 𝑡, ′), where 𝐻 𝑡 is the torso of (𝑇′, ′). Note that the depth of 𝑡′ is always strictly greater than the depth of 𝑡(𝑡 1
and 𝑡 , respectively) in the first (second, respectively) case. Thus, the adhesion of any other node in 𝑇′−𝑡′in (𝑇′, ′)is the same as
2
in (𝑇, ). Hence, 𝐭𝐜𝐰(𝐺′) ≤𝐭𝐜𝐰(𝐺). □
5. The min-max atomic congestion problem
In this section, we turn our attention to the more general setting where instead of requiring all agents to be routed to their
destinations, we allow for some agents to remain unrouted. In essence, this asks for a flow assignment that counterbalances the
number of agents that reach their destinations with the total cost. As is usual in complexity-theoretic analysis, we state this task as a
decision problem where we consider specific bounds on both the cost and the number of agents which need not be routed. For the
purposes of this section, we formally extend the notion of flow assignment(defined in Section2) to a mapping from a subset of agents
to paths.
Min-MaxSystemOpt.AtomicCongestion(mSOAC)
Input: A digraph 𝐺=(𝑉, 𝐸), positive integers 𝜆and 𝛼, a set 𝐴 ={𝑎 1, … , 𝑎 𝑚}of agents where each agent 𝑎 𝑖 is associated with
a tuple (𝑠 𝑖, 𝑡 𝑖) ∈𝑉2, and for each arc 𝑒 ∈𝐸, a latency function 𝓁 𝑒∶[𝑚] →ℝ ≥0∪∑{∞}.
Question: Is there a flow assignment 𝐹 routing at least 𝑚 −𝛼agents such that 𝑒∈𝐸𝑓 𝐹(𝑒) ⋅𝓁 𝑒(𝑓 𝐹(𝑒)) ≤𝜆?
We begin by noting that, in spite of the seemingly minor difference between the two problems,mSOACis much more challenging
thanSOACfrom a structural point of view. Indeed, on one hand, if we set 𝛼=0, the min-max variant becomes equivalent toSOAC.
On the other hand, without this restriction, it can be observed thatmSOACremains 𝖭𝖯-hard even on networks with a maximum
capacity of 1whose skeletons are trees. This follows by an immediate reduction from theMaximum Arc Disjoint Pathsproblem,
which has been shown to be 𝖭𝖯-hard in precisely this setting[20]; the reduction simply replaces each path with an agent and sets
the latency function for each arc in the same way as in the proof of Theorem2.
As the final contribution of this article, we show thatmSOACis fixed-parameter tractable when parameterized simultaneously by
𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡, 𝛼, and the combined parameter of treewidth and maximum degree.
Theorem 7. mSOACis fixed-parameter tractable when parameterized by the treewidth and maximum degree of the skeleton 𝐺of the input
digraph 𝐺plus the maximum capacity 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡and 𝛼.
Proof. On a high level, the algorithm follows the same overall approach as the one employed in the proof of Theorem5; however,
the dynamic programming steps and records required here are different (and more complicated). We begin by invoking Lemma2to
compute a spanning tree 𝑇 over a supergraph 𝐻 of 𝐺such that there is an integer 𝑘 ∈(𝑑2𝑤2)which is an upper-bound for both
11

C.Brand,R.Ganian,S.Kalyanasundarametal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104241
the edge-cut width of (𝐻, 𝑇)and the maximum degree of 𝑇. As in the proof of Theorem5, we mark an arbitrary leaf of 𝑇 as the root
and denote it𝑟.
Recalling the notions of outgoing and incoming agents for a node 𝑣from Theorem5, it will be useful to observe that if 𝑇 contains
a node 𝑣such that the number of outgoing or incoming agents in  𝑣exceeds 𝛼+𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡⋅(𝑘 +1), then we can immediately recognize the
input as a NO-instance; this is because at most 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡⋅(𝑘 +1)paths can traverse the edges forming the cut between  𝑣 and the rest of
the network. Hence, we hereinafter assume that the number of incoming and outgoing agents are both bounded by 𝛼+𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡⋅(𝑘 +1),
and proceed to formalizing the dynamic programming records used in our algorithm. We define a similar notion of a snapshot at a
vertex 𝑣 ∈𝑉(𝐻), albeit here snapshots are tuples of the form ( ,  , 𝛼′,  ,  , , )where:
out in out in
•  is a subset of the set of all outgoing agents for 𝑣;
out
•  is a subset of the set of all incoming agents for 𝑣;
in
• 𝛼′≤𝛼is a non-negative integer;
•  outis a mapping from  outto arcs in 𝜕 𝑣which are outgoing from  𝑣;
•  inis a mapping from  into arcs in 𝜕 𝑣which are incoming to  𝑣;
• is a multiset of pairs (𝑒, 𝑓)such that 𝑒is an incoming arc into  𝑣, 𝑓 is an outgoing arc from  𝑣, and 𝑒𝑓 is not a 2-cycle;
• is a multiset of pairs (𝑒, 𝑓)such that 𝑒is an outgoing arc from  𝑣, 𝑓 is an incoming arc into  𝑣, and 𝑒𝑓 is not a 2-cycle;
• each arc in 𝜕 𝑣may only appear in at most 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡tuples over all of the entries in  out,  in, , .
Comparing the snapshots defined above with those used in the proof of Theorem5, the only difference is that we (1) use 𝛼′ to
keep track of how many agents have been left unrouted in  𝑣, and (2) we use  outand  into keep track of the identities of outgoing
and incoming agents which are not being routed. Hence, we can upper-bound the total number of possible snapshots for an arbitrary
vertex 𝑣as a product of the number of possible snapshots in the proof of Theorem5(i.e., (𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡+𝑘)(𝚌𝚖𝚊𝚡𝑘2)) times the number of
choices for 𝛼′ (i.e., 𝛼) times the number of choices for  and  (i.e., 2(𝛼+𝚌𝚖𝚊𝚡⋅𝑘)). Altogether, this yields an upper-bound of
in out
(𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡+𝑘)(𝛼⋅𝚌𝚖𝚊𝚡⋅𝑘2).
The syntax of the record at 𝑣, denoted Record(𝑣) is a mapping from Snap(𝑣) to ℝ ≥0∪{∞}. For the semantics, Record(𝑣) will
capture the minimum cost required to (1) route the outgoing and incoming agents specified in  and  to the designated arcs in
out in
 and  while leaving the remaining outgoing and incoming agents unrouted, under the following three assumptions: (2) some
out in
(unidentified and arbitrary) agents will use arcs of 𝜕 𝑣 to enter and then exit  𝑣 precisely via the arcs designated in , (3) some
(unidentified and arbitrary) agents will use arcs of 𝜕 𝑣 to exit and then return to  𝑣via the arcs designated in , and (4) precisely 𝛼′
many agents with at least one endpoint in  𝑣 are not routed to their destinations.
Formalizing the above, Record(𝑣) maps each snapshot Υ to the minimum cost of a flow assignment 𝐹 in the subinstance 
Υ
induced on the vertices of  𝑣plus the arcs5of 𝜕 𝑣with the following properties:
1. for each pair (𝑎𝑏, 𝑐𝑑)of arcs in the multiset such that 𝑏, 𝑐∈ 𝑣, we add a new marker agent into 𝐼 Υwhich starts at 𝑎and ends
at 𝑑;
2. for each pair (𝑎𝑏, 𝑐𝑑)of arcs in the multiset such that 𝑎, 𝑑∈ 𝑣, we add a new arc 𝑏𝑐 into  and set 𝓁 𝑏𝑐∶={1 ↦0} ∪{𝑖 ↦
Υ
∞|𝑖 >1}.
3. for each outgoing agent 𝑎 𝑖in  out, 𝐹 contains a path from 𝑠 𝑖into the arc  out(𝑎 𝑖);
4. for each incoming agent 𝑎 𝑖in  in, 𝐹 contains a path from (and including) the arc  in(𝑎 𝑖)to 𝑡 𝑖;
5. 𝐹 routes all agents with at least one endpoint in 𝐹 except for 𝛼′many. Moreover, each outgoing (incoming, respectively) agent
that is not in  ( , respectively) is not routed by 𝐹.
out in
We remark that if no flow with these properties exists, we simply set Record(𝑣)(Υ) ∶=∞. This completes the formal definition of
the records Record(𝑣). Observe that since  𝑟=𝐺and 𝜕 𝑟=∅, the only snapshots at 𝑟are of the form  𝛼′=(∅, ∅, 𝛼′, {∅}, {∅}, ∅, ∅), and
each of these snapshots is mapped by Record(𝑟)to the minimum cost of a flow assignment in the input network which routes all but
precisely 𝛼′ agents to their destinations. Hence, min𝛼′∈[𝛼]Record(𝑟)( 𝛼′)is the minimum cost of a flow assignment 𝐹 which routes
at least 𝑚 −𝛼agents, and thus, to conclude the proof it remains to show how to compute the records at each vertex in a leaf-to-root
fashion.
Towards this task, let us first consider the computation of Record(𝑣)for a leaf 𝑣in 𝑇. This step is based on exhaustive branching
and is entirely analogous to the one employed in the proof of Theorem5, but with the distinction that we also branch on  and
in
 (it is worth noting that, for leaves, each choice of  and  fully determines the value of 𝛼′). More precisely, we observe
out in out
that each of the constructed instances  Υconsists of the at most 2𝑘 +2arcs in 𝜕 𝑣, the at most (𝑘 +1) ⋅𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡arcs obtained from , and
the at most (2𝑘 +2) ⋅𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡agents that are in  inor  outfor 𝑣. The number of paths in such an instance is upper-bounded by 2(𝑘⋅𝚌𝚖𝚊𝚡).
Hence, the minimum cost of a flow assignment 𝐹 in  that routes all the agents in  and  can be computed by enumerating
Υ in out
all flow assignments in time at most 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡2(𝑘⋅𝚌𝚖𝚊𝚡) .
The core of the dynamic program lies in the computation of Record(𝑣) for a non-leaf vertex 𝑣. We do so by considering each
snapshot Υ =( ,  , 𝛼′,  ,  , , ) at 𝑣 independently, and computing the minimum cost of a flow assignment 𝐹 in the
out in out in
subinstance  as follows. Unlike in Theorem5, we directly construct the instance  for which we need to compute the minimum
Υ Υ
5 As before, only one of the endpoints of 𝜕 𝑣lies in  𝑣, and hence, these are not formally arcs in  𝑣.
12

C.Brand,R.Ganian,S.Kalyanasundarametal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104241
cost of a flow assignment, as here we do not distinguish between “simple” and “complex” children, followed by a construction of the
same “kernelized” instance + as earlier (whereas this time, we treat everychild of 𝑣as complex). In particular, for each child 𝑤of
Υ
𝑣, we
1. delete every vertex in  𝑤except for the endpoints of 𝜕 𝑤;
2. for each pair of endpoints 𝑎, 𝑏 ∈𝑉( 𝑤)of distinct arcs in 𝜕 𝑤, add bi-directional “marker” arcs between 𝑎and 𝑏;
3. create a vertex 𝑤 out, add a directed arc from 𝑤 out to every endpoint of an arc 𝜕 𝑤 in 𝑉( 𝑤), and for outgoing agent 𝑎 𝑖 at 𝑤we
place 𝑠 𝑖on 𝑤 out;
4. create a vertex 𝑤 in, add a directed arc from every endpoint of an arc 𝜕 𝑤in 𝑉( 𝑤)to 𝑤 in, and for an incoming agent 𝑎 𝑖at 𝑤we
place 𝑡 𝑖on 𝑤 in.
As before, the newly created arcs are not associated with a latency function (or alternatively may be assumed to be associated with
the degenerate latency function ℕ →{0}), and we observe that the number of vertices in +is upper-bounded by (𝑘 ⋅2𝑘) +1 ≤(𝑘2).
Υ
𝑘(𝑘2),
The number of paths in such an instance is upper-bounded by and hence, the total number of all possible flow assignments
(regardless of the subset of routed agents) can be upper-bounded by 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡𝑘(𝑘2) . We proceed by branching over each choice of a
potential flow assignment 𝐹 from this set of all potential flow assignments.
Next, we deal with the fact that 𝐹 need not be a flow assignment of all agents by performing an additional bounded branching
step to determine which of the outgoing and incoming agents from each child of 𝑣is actually routed by 𝐹. To this end, let an agent
be importantfor 𝑣if it is an incoming or outgoing agent for at least one child of 𝑣, but is neither an incoming nor outgoing agent for
𝑣; in other words, important agents are those which are explicitly tracked by the snapshots of the children of 𝑣, but are no longer
tracked by snapshots of 𝑣itself. The number of important agents is upper-bounded by 𝑘 ⋅(𝛼+𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡⋅𝑘), and we branch over each
subset of important children for 𝑣. Finally, we branch over all mappings 𝛽 from the children of 𝑣to [𝛼].
For each fixed 𝐹, , and 𝛽, we check that 𝐹 routes the agents in to their final destinations and the agents in  and  to
in out
their assigned arcs as per  and  , respectively. As previously in the proof of Theorem5, we also perform a further technical
in out
check to ensure that each path in 𝑃 only contains a marker arc 𝑒in a child 𝑤if 𝑒is immediately preceded and also succeeded by an
arc in 𝜕 𝑤. If these checks succeed, we view 𝐹 as a “projection” of a flow assignment in  Υonto  Υ+. In particular, 𝐹 restricted to the
arcs with at most one endpoint in a child 𝑤of 𝑣fully determines (1) the first arc in 𝜕 𝑤used by an outgoing agent for 𝑤, (2) the last
arc in 𝜕 𝑤 used by an incoming agent for 𝑤, (3) which pairs of arcs in 𝜕 𝑤 are used by paths to leave and subsequently re-enter  𝑤,
and (4) which pairs of arcs in 𝜕 𝑤are used by paths to enter and subsequently leave  𝑤. This information, combined with information
about which outgoing and incoming agents for 𝑤are actually routed by the flow (specified in ) and information about how many
total agents with an endpoint in  ∑𝑤are not routed by the flow (specified in 𝛽(𝑤)), hence fully identifies a unique snapshot Ψ𝑤 of 𝑤.
𝐹
We define the cost of 𝐹 as 𝑏(𝑣) + 𝑤isachildof𝑣Record(𝑤)(Ψ𝑤 𝐹). Finally, we set Record(𝑣)(Υ)to be the minimum cost of a flow 𝐹 in
+which satisfies the conditions stipulated above; this concludes the description of the algorithm.
Υ
The running time of the algorithm can be upper-bounded by the number of vertices in the input digraph times the cost of processing
each vertex, whereas the latter is dominated by 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡(𝑑𝑤)(𝑑4𝑤4)⋅2𝑑2𝑤2⋅(𝛼+𝚌𝚖𝚊𝚡⋅𝑑2𝑤2)⋅𝛼𝑤2𝑑2 , i.e., by 2(𝑑⋅𝑤⋅𝛼⋅𝚌𝚖𝚊𝚡)(𝑑4𝑤4) . The algorithm can
be made constructive in the same way as in Theorem5. For correctness, we argue that if the input instance admits a flow assignment 𝑄
of at most 𝛼agents with some minimum cost, say 𝑝, then the algorithm will compute a flow assignment with the same cost 𝑝. Towards
this goal, we observe that at each vertex 𝑣considered in the leaf-to-root pass made by the dynamic program, 𝑄will correspond to a
unique snapshot Υof 𝑣. At each leaf 𝑣of 𝑇, Record(𝑣)(Υ)must be equal to the cost incurred by 𝑄on the arcs in 𝜕 𝑣due to the nature
of our brute-force computation of the records for trees and the optimality of 𝑄. Moreover, for each non-leaf node 𝑣it holds that as
long as we have correctly computed the records for each of its children, the traversal of 𝑄via the arcs in 𝜕 𝑣and 𝜕 𝑤for each child of
𝑤identifies a unique valid flow assignment 𝐹 in +. Moreover, from 𝑄we can also recover a unique set of important agents for
Υ
𝑣as well as a unique mapping 𝛽 which specifies how many agents were not routed among those with at least one endpoint in each
of the children∑ of 𝑣. These sets altogether define a snapshot Ψ𝑤 for each child 𝑤of 𝑣. In that case, however, 𝑄must indeed incur a
𝐹
cost of 𝑏(𝑣) + 𝑤isachildof𝑣Record(𝑤)(Ψ𝑤 𝐹)over all arcs in  Υ, as desired. □
6. Concluding remarks
Our results provide an essentially comprehensive complexity landscape for the problem of computing system-optimal flow as-
signments in atomic congestion games, closing a gap in the literature that contrasts with the significant attention other aspects of
congestion games have received to date. We remark that our tractability results only require the input network to have the necessary
structural properties and do not impose any restrictions on the possible origins and destinations of the agents. Moreover, all of the
obtained algorithms can also be used to compute Nash-equilibria in atomic congestion games as long as an upper-bound on the cost
of the flow is provided in the input. Future work could also consider the recently proposed setting of having some agents follow a
greedily computed route[58].
Another interesting avenue for future work would be to resolve the complexity of the min-max variant of the problem (i.e.,mSOAC)
on well-structured networks of unbounded degree. This problem is left open even on stars when parameterized by 𝚌 𝚖𝚊𝚡+𝛼, and we
believe novel ideas will be required to breach this barrier; in particular, the techniques for solving the maximization variant of the
relatedArc Disjoint Pathsproblem on stars[20]do not generalize tomSOAC. As a longer-term goal, one would be interested
13

C.Brand,R.Ganian,S.Kalyanasundarametal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104241
in settling whether Theorem7could be lifted towards an analog of Theorem5that relies on the same structural measures of the
network.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Cornelius Brand:Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis,
Conceptualization.Robert Ganian:Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Methodology, Investigation,
Formal analysis, Conceptualization.Subrahmanyam Kalyanasundaram:Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visu-
alization, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.Fionn McInerney:Writing – review & editing, Writing –
original draft, Visualization, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
The first, second, and fourth authors were supported by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF, project Y1329). The third author was
supported by SERB-DST via grants MTR/2020/000497 and CRG/2022/009400.
Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.
References
[1]AneesAbu-Monshar,AmmarAl-Bazi,Amulti-objectivecentralisedagent-basedoptimisationapproachforvehicleroutingproblemwithuniquevehicles,Appl.
SoftComput.125(2022)109187.
[2]HeinerAckermann,HeikoRöglin,BertholdVöcking,Ontheimpactofcombinatorialstructureoncongestiongames,in:47thAnnualIEEESymposiumon
FoundationsofComputerScience(FOCS2006),IEEEComputerSociety,2006,pp.613–622.
[3]E.Anshelevich,A.Dasgupta,J.Kleinberg,E.Tardos,T.Wexler,T.Roughgarden,Thepriceofstabilityfornetworkdesignwithfaircostallocation,in:45th
AnnualIEEESymposiumonFoundationsofComputerScience,2004,pp.295–304.
[4]ItaiAshlagi,DovMonderer,MosheTennenholtz,Learningequilibriuminresourceselectiongames,in:Proc.ofthe22ndAAAIConferenceonArtificialIntelligence,
2007,pp.18–23.
[5]BaruchAwerbuch,YossiAzar,AmirEpstein,Thepriceofroutingunsplittableflow,in:Proc.ofthe37thAnnualACMSymposiumonTheoryofComputing,2005,
pp.57–66.
[6]DietmarBerwanger,AnujDawar,PaulHunter,StephanKreutzer,JanObdrzálek,Thedag-widthofdirectedgraphs,J.Comb.Theory,Ser.B102(4)(2012)
900–923.
[7]NiclasBoehmer,EdithElkind,Individual-basedstabilityinhedonicdiversitygames,in:Proc.ofthe34thAAAIConferenceonArtificialIntelligence,2020,
pp.1822–1829.
[8]NiclasBoehmer,EdithElkind,Stableroommateproblemwithdiversitypreferences,in:Proc.ofthe29thInternationalJointConferenceonArtificialIntelligence,
2020,pp.96–102.
[9]CorneliusBrand,RobertGanian,SubrahmanyamKalyanasundaram,FionnMcInerney,Thecomplexityofoptimizingatomiccongestion,in:Proc.ofthe38th
AAAIConferenceonArtificialIntelligence,2024,pp.20044–20052.
[10] TimothyF.N.Chan,JacobW.Cooper,MartinKoutecký,DanielKrál,KristýnaPekárková,Matricesofoptimaltree-depthandarow-invariantparameterized
algorithmforintegerprogramming,SIAMJ.Comput.51(3)(2022)664–700.
[11] ZhibinChen,XiLin,YafengYin,MengLi,Pathcontrollingofautomatedvehiclesforsystemoptimumontransportationnetworkswithheterogeneoustraffic
stream,Transp.Res.,PartC,Emerg.Technol.110(2020)312–329.
[12] GeorgeChristodoulou,EliasKoutsoupias,Thepriceofanarchyoffinitecongestiongames,in:Proc.ofthe37thAnnualACMSymposiumonTheoryofComputing,
2005,pp.67–73.
[13] RobertoCominetti,MarcoScarsini,MarcSchröder,NicolásE.StierMoses,Priceofanarchyinstochasticatomiccongestiongameswithaffinecosts,in:Proc.of
the2019ACMConferenceonEconomicsandComputation,2019,pp.579–580.
[14] MarekCygan,FedorV.Fomin,LukaszKowalik,DanielLokshtanov,DánielMarx,MarcinPilipczuk,MichalPilipczuk,SaketSaurabh,ParameterizedAlgorithms,
Springer,2015.
[15] YogeshDahiya,FedorV.Fomin,FahadPanolan,KirillSimonov,Fixed-parameterandapproximationalgorithmsforPCAwithoutliers,in:Proc.ofthe38th
InternationalConferenceonMachineLearning,ICML2021,in:Proc.ofMachineLearningResearch,vol.139,2021,pp.2341–2351.
[16] ReinhardDiestel,GraphTheory,4thedition,GraduateTextsinMathematics,vol.173,Springer,2012.
[17] RodneyG.Downey,MichaelR.Fellows,FundamentalsofParameterizedComplexity,TextsinComputerScience.,Springer,2013.
[18] PavelDvorák,EduardEiben,RobertGanian,DusanKnop,SebastianOrdyniak,ThecomplexitylandscapeofdecompositionalparametersforILP:programswith
fewglobalvariablesandconstraints,Artif.Intell.300(2021)103561.
[19] EduardEiben,RobertGanian,DusanKnop,SebastianOrdyniak,Solvingintegerquadraticprogrammingviaexplicitandstructuralrestrictions,in:Proc.ofthe
33rdAAAIConferenceonArtificialIntelligence,2019,pp.1477–1484.
[20] ThomasErlebach,KlausJansen,Themaximumedge-disjointpathsprobleminbidirectedtrees,SIAMJ.DiscreteMath.14(3)(2001)326–355.
[21] AlexFabrikant,ChristosH.Papadimitriou,KunalTalwar,ThecomplexityofpureNashequilibria,in:Proc.ofthe36thAnnualACMSymposiumonTheoryof
Computing,2004,pp.604–612.
[22] KrzysztofFleszar,MatthiasMnich,JoachimSpoerhase,Newalgorithmsformaximumdisjointpathsbasedontree-likeness,Math.Program.171(1–2)(2018)
433–461.
14

C.Brand,R.Ganian,S.Kalyanasundarametal. ArtificialIntelligence338(2025)104241
[23] EugenFüchsle,HendrikMolter,RolfNiedermeier,MalteRenken,Delay-robustroutesintemporalgraphs,in:39thInternationalSymposiumonTheoretical
AspectsofComputerScience,STACS2022,in:LIPIcs,vol.219,SchlossDagstuhl-Leibniz-ZentrumfürInformatik,2022,pp.30:1–30:15.
[24] RobertGanian,TheklaHamm,DusanKnop,SimonSchierreich,OndrejSuchý,Hedonicdiversitygames:acomplexitypicturewithmorethantwocolors,in:
Proc.ofthe36thAAAIConferenceonArtificialIntelligence,2022,pp.5034–5042.
[25] RobertGanian,TheklaHamm,ViktoriiaKorchemna,KarolinaOkrasa,KirillSimonov,Thecomplexityofk-meansclusteringwhenlittleisknown,in:International
ConferenceonMachineLearning,ICML2022,in:Proc.ofMachineLearningResearch,vol.162,2022,pp.6960–6987.
[26] RobertGanian,IyadA.Kanj,SebastianOrdyniak,StefanSzeider,Parameterizedalgorithmsforthematrixcompletionproblem,in:Proc.ofthe35thInternational
ConferenceonMachineLearning,ICML2018,in:Proc.ofMachineLearningResearch,vol.80,2018,pp.1642–1651.
[27] RobertGanian,EunJungKim,StefanSzeider,Algorithmicapplicationsoftree-cutwidth,SIAMJ.DiscreteMath.36(4)(2022)2635–2666.
[28] RobertGanian,ViktoriiaKorchemna,ThecomplexityofBayesiannetworklearning:revisitingthesuperstructure,in:AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessing
Systems34:AnnualConferenceonNeuralInformationProcessingSystems2021,NeurIPS2021,2021,pp.430–442.
[29] RobertGanian,ViktoriiaKorchemna,Slimtree-cutwidth,Algorithmica86(8)(2024)2714–2738.
[30] RobertGanian,SebastianOrdyniak,ThecomplexitylandscapeofdecompositionalparametersforILP,Artif.Intell.257(2018)61–71.
[31] RobertGanian,SebastianOrdyniak,Thepowerofcut-basedparametersforcomputingedge-disjointpaths,Algorithmica83(2)(2021)726–752.
[32] RobertGanian,SebastianOrdyniak,RamanujanSridharan,Onstructuralparameterizationsoftheedgedisjointpathsproblem,in:28thInternationalSymposium
onAlgorithmsandComputation,ISAAC2017,in:LIPIcs,vol.92,SchlossDagstuhl-Leibniz-ZentrumfürInformatik,2017,pp.36:1–36:13.
[33] DidemGözüpek,SibelÖzkan,ChristophePaul,IgnasiSau,MordechaiShalom,ParameterizedcomplexityoftheMINCCAproblemongraphsofboundeddecom-
posability,Theor.Comput.Sci.690(2017)91–103.
[34] NielsGrüttemeier,ChristianKomusiewicz,LearningBayesiannetworksundersparsityconstraints:aparameterizedcomplexityanalysis,J.Artif.Intell.Res.74
(2022)1225–1267.
[35] NielsGrüttemeier,ChristianKomusiewicz,NilsMorawietz,Ontheparameterizedcomplexityofpolytreelearning,in:Proc.ofthe30thInternationalJoint
ConferenceonArtificialIntelligence,2021,pp.4221–4227.
[36] TobiasHarks,MonaHenle,MaxKlimm,JannikMatuschke,AnjaSchedel,Multi-leadercongestiongameswithanadversary,in:Proc.ofthe36thAAAIConference
onArtificialIntelligence,2022,pp.5068–5075.
[37] TaoanHuang,JiaoyangLi,SvenKoenig,BistraDilkina,Anytimemulti-agentpathfindingviamachinelearning-guidedlargeneighborhoodsearch,in:Proc.of
the36thAAAIConferenceonArtificialIntelligence,2022,pp.9368–9376.
[38] PaulHunter,StephanKreutzer,Digraphmeasures:Kellydecompositions,games,andorderings,Theor.Comput.Sci.399(3)(2008)206–219.
[39] DevanshJalota,KirilSolovey,MatthewTsao,StephenZoepf,MarcoPavone,Balancingfairnessandefficiencyintrafficroutingviainterpolatedtrafficassignment,
Auton.AgentsMulti-AgentSyst.37(2)(2023)32.
[40] ThorJohnson,NeilRobertson,PaulD.Seymour,RobinThomas,Directedtree-width,J.Comb.Theory,Ser.B82(1)(2001)138–154.
[41] TomohiroKoana,VincentFroese,RolfNiedermeier,Thecomplexityofbinarymatrixcompletionunderdiameterconstraints,J.Comput.Syst.Sci.132(2023)
45–67.
[42] TomohiroKoana,ViatcheslavKorenwein,AndréNichterlein,RolfNiedermeier,PhilippZschoche,Datareductionformaximummatchingonreal-worldgraphs:
theoryandexperiments,ACMJ.Exp.Algorithmics26(2021)1.3.
[43] JanneH.Korhonen,PekkaParviainen,TractableBayesiannetworkstructurelearningwithboundedvertexcovernumber,in:AdvancesinNeuralInformation
ProcessingSystems28:AnnualConferenceonNeuralInformationProcessingSystems2015,2015,pp.622–630.
[44] S.Kunniyur,R.Srikant,End-to-endcongestioncontrolschemes:utilityfunctions,randomlossesandecnmarks,IEEE/ACMTrans.Netw.11(5)(2003)689–702.
[45] AlbertoMarchesi,MatteoCastiglioni,NicolaGatti,Leadershipincongestiongames:multipleuserclassesandnon-singletonactions,in:Proc.ofthe28thInter-
nationalJointConferenceonArtificialIntelligence,2019,pp.485–491.
[46] DánielMarx,PaulWollan,Immersionsinhighlyedgeconnectedgraphs,SIAMJ.DiscreteMath.28(1)(2014)503–520.
[47] ReshefMeir,MosheTennenholtz,YoramBachrach,PeterB.Key,Congestiongameswithagentfailures,in:Proc.ofthe26thAAAIConferenceonArtificial
Intelligence,2012.
[48] JaroslavNesetril,PatriceOssonadeMendez,Sparsity-Graphs,Structures,andAlgorithms,AlgorithmsandCombinatorics,vol.28,Springer,2012.
[49] RolfNiedermeier,InvitationtoFixed-ParameterAlgorithms,OxfordLectureSeriesinMathematicsandItsApplications,OxfordUniversityPublishing,Oxford,
2006.
[50] SebastianOrdyniak,StefanSzeider,ParameterizedcomplexityresultsforexactBayesiannetworkstructurelearning,J.Artif.Intell.Res.46(2013)263–302.
[51] QuangAnhPham,MinhHoàngHà,DuyManhVu,HuyHoangNguyen,Ahybridgeneticalgorithmforthevehicleroutingproblemwithroamingdelivery
locations,in:Proc.ofthe32ndInternationalConferenceonAutomatedPlanningandScheduling,2022,pp.297–306.
[52] StefanPorschen,TatjanaSchmidt,EwaldSpeckenmeyer,AndreasWotzlaw,XSATandNAE-SAToflinearCNFclasses,DiscreteAppl.Math.167(2014)1–14.
[53] NeilRobertson,PaulD.Seymour,Graphminors.II.algorithmicaspectsoftree-width,J.Algorithms7(3)(1986)309–322.
[54] RobertW.Rosenthal,Aclassofgamespossessingpure-strategyNashequilibria,Int.J.GameTheory(1973).
[55] TatjanaSchmidt,ComputationalcomplexityofSAT,XSATandNAE-SATforlinearandmixedHornCNFformulas,PhDthesis,UniversityofCologne,2010.
[56] P.D.Seymour,R.Thomas,Graphsearchingandamin-maxtheoremfortree-width,J.Comb.Theory,Ser.B58(1)(1993)22–33.
[57] GuniSharon,Alleviatingroadtrafficcongestionwithartificialintelligence,in:IJCAI,2021,pp.4965–4969.
[58] GuniSharon,MichaelAlbert,TarunRambha,StephenD.Boyles,PeterStone,Trafficoptimizationforamixtureofself-interestedandcompliantagents,in:Proc.
ofthe32ndAAAIConferenceonArtificialIntelligence,2018,pp.1202–1209.
[59] GuniSharon,JosiahP.Hanna,TarunRambha,MichaelW.Levin,MichaelAlbert,StephenD.Boyles,PeterStone,Real-timeadaptivetollingschemeforoptimized
socialwelfareintrafficnetworks,in:Proc.ofthe16thInternationalConferenceonAutonomousAgentsandMultiagentSystems,2017.
[60] GuniSharon,MichaelW.Levin,JosiahP.Hanna,TarunRambha,StephenD.Boyles,PeterStone,Network-wideadaptivetollingforconnectedandautomated
vehicles,Transp.Res.,PartC,Emerg.Technol.84(2017)142–157.
[61] KaiWang,LilyXu,AndrewPerrault,MichaelK.Reiter,MilindTambe,Coordinatingfollowerstoreachbetterequilibria:end-to-endgradientdescentforStack-
elberggames,in:Proc.ofthe36thAAAIConferenceonArtificialIntelligence,2022,pp.5219–5227.
15

